

=== PAGE 61 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
of success and to help create better standards for evaluating explanation faithfulness (Schwettmann
et al., 2023; Räuker et al., 2023). In addition to standardizing faithfulness evaluations, benchmarks
will be most useful when they have clear implications for applications like detecting and mitigating
alignment failures. In order to catch worst-case outcomes, explanation faithfulness may need to be
evaluated particularly in adversarial settings, where models are optimized to exhibit certain alignment
failures that we try to then detect and mitigate (for example, as done in trojan detection: Center
for AI Safety, 2023; Casper et al., 2023b; Rando et al., 2024). For such cases, there is a need to
design faithfulness metrics that focus on worst-case rather than average-case explanation faithfulness.
Alternatively, evaluations could focus on faithfulness for high-risk inputs rather than the whole data
distribution.
A similar notion of faithfulness applies to model explanations based on externalized reasoning as well.
A common way to evaluate faithfulness in the context of natural-language-based externalized reasoning
is to intervene on model inputs and check that previous explanations agree with model outputs (i.e.
intermediate reasoning steps, final predictions) on the new inputs. Unfortunately, in general, deter-
mining whether reasoning stated in natural language is consistent with an observed behavior or not
reduces to a logical entailment (natural language inference) task (Dagan et al., 2005), which are known
to be highly subjective and difficult to properly annotate (Pavlick and Kwiatkowski, 2019). As a result,
current works that study the faithfulness of externalized reasoning only focus on simple tasks, e.g.
multiple-choice questions (Lanham et al., 2023). Furthermore, given that the input space is quite large
for LLMs, efficiently surfacing data for which model behavior will be inconsistent with previously stated
reasoning can be extremely challenging (Chen et al., 2023b). Efficiently surfacing inconsistent behavior
may require a hypothesis about why models might be inconsistent. For example, one might need to
suspect that models are sensitive to answer choice ordering, in order to discover that models give incon-
sistent answers when perturbing this part of the prompt. As a result, detecting inconsistencies between
stated reasoning and model behavior across datapoints is a difficult problem for humans to efficiently
solve on their own. Scalable oversight methods (c.f. Section 3.3.7), which often use LLMs to assist
humans in evaluations of a particular task, could help detect unfaithful reasoning efficiently (Saunders
et al., 2022; Bowman et al., 2022). In cases where an automated measure of evaluating faithfulness for
an (input, output, explanation) triplet is available, adversarial optimization could be used to efficiently
search for perturbations to a given input to generate outputs inconsistent with a given explanation.
While within this section, we have primarily focused our discussion on evaluating the faithfulness of
explanations, in practice, explanations may need to fulfill additional desiderata to be useful to intended
users, e.g. minimality (Wang et al., 2022) or ease-of-understanding (Bhatt et al., 2020). Hence, we
stress that any claims about the interpretability methods being ready to be used by practitioners ought
to be accompanied by context-based evaluations of interpretability methods, using e.g. user-studies.
These context-based evaluations should strive to reflect realistic use cases and users.
3.4.4 Can Interpretability Methods Maintain Validity When Used to Modify Model Behavior?
A number of approaches have been developed that allow modifying LLMs behaviors by intervening
on sources of those behaviors (e.g. representations) within the model. This includes techniques such
as model editing (Mitchell et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022; Hernandez et al., 2023a; Tan et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023h), subspace ablation (Li et al., 2023c; Kodge et al., 2023), and representation editing
(Li et al., 2023b; Turner et al., 2023a;b; Li et al., 2023d; Zou et al., 2023a; Gandikota et al., 2023).
Currently, these methods have only had limited success (see Section 3.2.4), however, as the scalability
and efficiency of interpretability techniques improve, it is likely that such methods may become more
popular and may see wider adoption. Indeed, prior work has used (other) interpretability methods
such as saliency maps for optimizing neural networks to act in the desired way (Ross et al., 2017;
Hendricks et al., 2018; Rieger et al., 2020; Stammer et al., 2021). Specific to LLMs, process supervision
has been used to provide feedback to a model to improve its externalized reasoning (Lightman et al.,
61

=== PAGE 62 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
2023). However, due to the prevalence of Goodharting (Chu et al., 2017; Manheim and Garrabrant,
2018; Lehman et al., 2020), there is a concern that using an interpretability method as an optimization
target may cause it to lose its validity due to overfitting. As a result, the underlying behavior that
is being targeted may continue to persist within the model, even if interpretability results no longer
indicate that it is present. Research is needed to understand to what extent this is a problem for various
techniques and how it might be addressed.
Challenges Specific to Interpreting Model Internals
In addition to the aforementioned challenges, there also exist several challenges specific to techniques
like representation probing and mechanistic interpretability that aim to understand representations and
mechanisms within neural networks. These challenges include limited knowledge of how representations
are structured within neural networks; polysemanticity of individual neurons; high sensitivity of inter-
pretability results to the datasets used for analysis and limited scalability of techniques used for feature
interpretation and circuit discovery.
3.4.5 Assuming Linearity of Feature Representation
A potential fundamental obstacle toward making progress in interpretability is that many methods
rely heavily on the assumption that features are represented ‘linearly’, i.e. as (linear) directions in the
activation space (Park et al., 2023b). Many studies have demonstrated the utility of this assumption in
interpreting (Alain and Bengio, 2018; Rogers et al., 2020; Elhage et al., 2022b) and controlling (Turner
et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023i) models, which lends support for this hypothesis.
However, Hernandez et al. (2023b) provide some evidence that some concepts might be represented
non-linearly. Further research is required to better understand which concepts are encoded linearly,
and which are encoded non-linearly. Factors such as model capacity may also affect whether a given
concept gets encoded linearly (potentially in a highly lossy way) or non-linearly. There is also a need
to better understand the differences between how different model representation spaces (e.g. MLPs vs.
attention layers) encode information. For example, are representations in later layers of the model more
or less likely to be structured linearly? Further, even if features are represented linearly, we still need
to define an appropriate inner product for assessing representation similarity, and it is not clear how
to choose an inner product over model hidden states (Park et al., 2023b). A better understanding of
these issues would enable us to design more reliable probing methods for assessing the informational
content of internal model representations and determining the similarity between representations.
3.4.6 Polysemanticity and Superposition
Individual neurons within a model can make a natural building block for constructing circuit-style
interpretations of models. However, a notable challenge with establishing interpretations of individual
neurons is that neurons often activate strongly for seemingly unrelated features in input data. This
has recently been dubbed polysemanticity by Elhage et al. (2022b). The authors also argue that
polysemanticity may be a result of models representing a large number of sparsely activated features
in a lower-dimensional hidden representation, and present a toy model of this phenomenon, which
they call ‘superposition’. Motivated by this hypothesis, recent work has used sparse autoencoders
to find more interpretable features (Sharkey et al., 2023; Graziani et al., 2023; Bricken et al., 2023;
Sucholutsky et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023). However, these sparse autoencoders can be orders
of magnitude larger than the language models they are trained to explain, which may be prohibitively
expensive for larger models (for further discussion on challenges in scaling interpretability analysis,
see Sections 3.4.8 and 3.4.9). More work is needed to understand the root causes of uninterpretable,
polysemantic features in large language models (relating it back to superposition, concept mismatch,
or other causes), which should help shed light on which interpretability approach best addresses the
root cause.
62

=== PAGE 63 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
3.4.7 Sensitivity of Interpretations to the Choice of Dataset
A specific dataset, which is often much smaller than the full training dataset, is typically used for
discovering concepts within a model. Discovered concepts can thus be highly sensitive to what samples
are included in the dataset used for concept discovery. Indeed, Ramaswamy et al. (2022) found that
various top-down (supervised) concept discovery methods produce conflicting explanations for the same
model output depending on which dataset was used to supervise the probe that detects concepts in the
model. A similar issue applies to bottom-up (unsupervised) concept discovery methods. A particular
neuron might activate on two distinctive sets of inputs depending on what dataset is used for retrieving
highly activating inputs, a phenomenon termed an interpretability illusion (Bolukbasi et al., 2021).
This high level of sensitivity to dataset design is concerning as this limits the generalizability of the
interpretability results. To remedy this issue, one could aim to develop datasets for probing that contain
all possible concepts of interest (which, for supervised concept discovery, would need to be labeled).
For LLMs, such a dataset could be the original model training data (McDougall et al., 2023). However,
there are clear compute issues that prohibit the use of pretraining data for concept discovery (e.g. even
performing a correlational analysis of documents that highly activate neurons would demand a runtime
proportional to pretraining). Given the fact that full training dataset can not be used, and use of any
subset of training data risks omitting some concepts used by a model in its outputs, future methods
should consider developing compute-adaptive methods for concept discovery that progressively grow a
seed dataset by exploring the dataspace in directions that plausibly contain novel concepts used by the
model for prediction.
3.4.8 Feature Interpretation Is Hard to Scale
Current techniques and methods used in mechanistic interpretability are quite primitive and difficult
to scale. Hence, so far, mechanistic interpretability has only successfully identified circuits explaining
95%+of the variance in model behavior for highly toy problems, like modular division (Nanda et al.,
2022).
Feature interpretation or concept-discovery, i.e. identifying what (human) concepts different model
features correspond to, is often the first step in interpreting the internal mechanisms of a model.
A typical approach for this is to assign meanings to model features by looking at data that highly
activates the feature; this generally requires a human to be in the loop to generate hypotheses about
what concepts the feature under study might be encoding, and then perform a faithfulness evaluation
for this hypothesis (like the “simulated neuron” experiment from (Bricken et al., 2023)). Both of these
steps are highly time-consuming. Bills et al. (2023) attempt to automate this process by using an
LLM, GPT-4, in the place of human, however, Huang et al. (2023b) show that concept labels generated
by GPT-4 in aforementioned work have high error rates, are often ambiguous in meaning and do not
provide a faithful explanation of model behavior on the whole. Furthermore, both human-in-the-loop
and LM-automated approaches may struggle to properly identify the meaning of individual features
due to the aforementioned issues of concept-mismatch problem (Section 3.4.2), polysemantic neurons
(Section 3.4.6) and subjectivity of results to the concept annotation processes (Section 3.4.7).
Researchers may consider exploring ways to sidestep the scalability limitations of feature interpretation
methods, e.g. by focusing on interpreting relevant features for alignment failures or that explain a
large portion of model behavior. Alternatively, instead of trying to interpret features directly at a
highly fine-grained level, it may be helpful to develop methods that begin by explaining features at
a higher level of abstraction, and then explain them at more fine-grained levels when necessary. For
example, sparse autoencoders with fewer learned features appear to represent features at a higher
level of abstraction, and more precision can be achieved later by fitting a model with more learned
features (Bricken et al., 2023). Using language models to automate the feature annotation is also a
promising approach worthy of further research and refinement (Hernandez et al., 2021; Bills et al.,
63

=== PAGE 64 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
2023). Automatic hypothesis generation methods could be developed to iteratively refine hypotheses
by finding instances of disagreement between the explanation and observed model behavior.
3.4.9 Circuit Discovery Is Hard to Scale
Isolating circuits within a large network is also highly challenging and typically done via manual in-
spection (Wang et al., 2022; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023). While there has been some recent progress
towards automating circuit discovery (Conmy et al., 2023); more work is needed to develop automated
and scalable methods for circuit discovery. The primary challenge for circuit discovery is that the
hypothesis space can be quite large, possibly combinatorial as anyof the subnetworks within a model
can be the desired circuit. The ACDC algorithm proposed by Conmy et al. gets around this issue by
initializing the whole network as the circuit, and then sequentially searching over the edges — deleting
any whose deletion does not impact the performance on task of interest. However, even this greedy
approach may be practically infeasible for extremely large models. This sequential deletion approach
also runs the risk of missing backupor secondary computational nodes from the identified circuits, which
only becomes active when the primary computational node is ablated (Wang et al., 2022).
Thus, there is a need for work to develop automated and scalable methods for circuit discovery. In
addition to designing theoretically grounded algorithms for circuit discovery, efficient heuristics could
also be developed to help improve the efficiency of search. It may also be useful to design circuit
discovery methods that operate at larger network scales than individual neurons and adjacent layers,
in order to reduce the size of the circuit hypothesis space.
Challenges Specific to Externalized Model Reasoning
One form of interpretability that has become popular with LLMs is externalized reasoning . Specifi-
cally, we attempt to make model reasoning visible to an external observer by steering models to make
predictions based on reasoning patterns that are by construction stated in natural language (making
them naturally interpretable). For example, chain-of-thought reasoning (Reynolds and McDonell, 2021;
Wei et al., 2022d; Kojima et al., 2022) prompts the model to break a problem down into sub-problems
and then compose the final solution by solving these sub-problems. Externalized reasoning can also be
performed using formal semantics, for example, program synthesis approaches use LLMs to generate
programs (code) that when executed solve the given problem. However, despite its intuitive appeal, this
strategy suffers from the fundamental challenges discussed above. Different variants of this strategy
also have other shortcomings. Natural-language-based externalized reasoning can be misleading and
unfaithful, while externalized reasoning methods that use formal semantics are difficult to apply to
open-ended tasks like question-answering.
3.4.10 Externalized Reasoning in Natural Language May Be Misleading
Externalized reasoning in natural language is a naturally attractive option for interpretability due to it
being interpretable to any human user without any requirements of specialized knowledge. However, for
ittobea reliableformofinterpretability, itmustfaithfullyindicatethecriticalcausalfactorsresponsible
for particular model behavior. However, Turpin et al. (2023) found that models’ CoT reasoning can
be heavily steered towards incorrect answers by biasing features in prompts — e.g. by having a user
suggest that a specific answer choice is correct. CoT explanations in such cases can give plausible
rationalizations for why the biased answer is correct, without mentioning the influence of the biasing
features in the prompt. In a similar result, Lanham et al. (2023) show that models can be insensitive
to edits made to their reasoning. This problem of models generating plausible yet unfaithful reasoning
may be exacerbated when models are applied to complex tasks that admit many plausible explanations
for any individual behavior. In these cases, it may be very easy for models to give inconsistent yet
plausible reasoning that could mask sensitivity to undisclosed factors influencing models.
Thefactsthatnatural-language-basedexternalizedreasoning oftenresultsinimprovedperformance, yet
can be unfaithful, are somewhat contradictory, and need to be reconciled. Lanham et al. (2023) evaluate
64

=== PAGE 65 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
some natural hypotheses in this regard, but further investigations, especially, with pretrained only
LLMs, are required to better understand to what extent externalized reasoning is causally responsible
for improved performance on various reasoning tasks (also see Section 2.4.5 for relevant discussion
on the computational necessity of intermediate computations for transformers to solve certain kinds
of reasoning tasks). Within this context, it would be useful to understand the extent to which our
training protocols directly incentivize unfaithfulness, e.g. whether reinforcement learning with human
feedback can cause models to learn to hide reasoning that would be disapproved by human evaluator
(Perez et al., 2022a; Scheurer et al., 2023a). A related open question is how to encourage methods
that supervise the reasoning process of the LLMs, e.g. process supervision (Lightman et al., 2023), to
improve the faithfulness of reasoning given by the model, and/or how to ensure they do not make it
less faithful.
There is also a need for research to develop methods that help improve the faithfulness of LLM-
reasoning. Some decomposition-based methods, that break down problem into subproblems and gen-
erate reasoning steps only for individual subproblems before recombining model reasoning and outputs
into a global solution, have reported improvements in the faithfulness of model reasoning (Eisenstein
et al., 2022; Radhakrishnan et al., 2023; Reppert et al., 2023). This indicates that imposing greater
structure on reasoning could help enforce the model to use consistent reasoning patterns, which can
in turn limit instances of plausible yet unfaithful reasoning. However, imposing structure does not
guarantee that the model respects the intended semantics of the structure, as indicated by issues like
steganography (Chu et al., 2017). An alternative research direction could be to train the models directly
to use consistent reasoning patterns across inputs (Chua et al., 2024).
Another fundamental issue faced by natural-language-based externalized reasoning is that for natural
languages, there exists a trade-off between completeness and efficiency of communication (Grice, 1975;
Piantadosi et al., 2012). This tradeoff dictates that for natural-language-based externalized reasoning
to be easy to evaluate for humans, a model must do some lossy compression of the complete reasoning,
when the complete reasoning is excessively lengthy (as may be the case for complex tasks). This may
result in unfaithful explanations if important elements of model reasoning get omitted. Alternatively,
if no compression is done, the generated explanation might be excessively long and difficult to evaluate
for humans; which may result in overlooked errors in the explanation. To avoid this pathology, it would
be useful to understand what level of completeness in explanations is required to avoid alignment
and safety failures and to develop interactive structured reasoning methods that may allow selectively
zooming-in on specific aspects of the model reasoning for which greater details are required, similar
to debate (Irving et al., 2018) (c.f. Section 3.3.7). Such approaches could be used to gain additional
information about individual high-stakes model decisions.
3.4.11 Externalized Reasoning via Formal Semantics Is Not Widely Applicable
Natural languages have informally defined semantics. As a result, natural languages have inherent
ambiguity which means different statements may have different meanings depending on the context,
and how the receiver interprets them (Huang et al., 2023b, Section 5.1). In contrast, languages with
formally defined semantics (e.g. programming languages like Haskell) have mathematically rigorous
interpretations associated with each individual construct, and also allow defining novel (higher-level)
constructs as needed. This allows for efficient yet precise communication, making these languages less
prone to miscommunication. These properties make formal semantics an attractive option as medium
of externalized reasoning as formal verification tools (Tabuada, 2009; Hoare et al., 2009) can be applied
to verify the correctness of this type of reasoning (Tegmark and Omohundro, 2023).
As a result, program synthesis approaches are being explored in which an LLM solves the given problem
bygeneratingaprogram(Austinetal.,2021). Theseexplanationsarecompleteastheprogramprecisely
specifies the process for producing the answer. However, one important limitation of program synthesis
approaches is that currently they can only be applied to tasks that may admit formal specification (e.g.
65

=== PAGE 66 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
mathematical reasoning) (Wu et al., 2022). As a result, using program synthesis approaches to solve
open-ended problems like question answering presents an important milestone for program synthesis
research(ZelleandMooney,1996;Berantetal.,2013;Yuetal.,2018;Lyuetal.,2022). Thismayrequire
developingnewdomain-specificprogramminglanguagesorcombininginterpretablestructuredreasoning
with individual modules implemented by blackbox neural networks that are verified in other ways
(Gupta and Kembhavi, 2022; Sur’is et al., 2023). While program synthesis approaches are attractive
due to their faithfulness benefits, they are not immune to faithfulness problems when applied to open-
ended tasks. Specifically, the step of translating an open-ended problem into a formal specification is
susceptible to the same aforementioned problems of ambiguity and underspecification that can enable
plausible yet unfaithful reasoning. A more fundamental question is to what extent various tasks are
amenable to being solved by a human-interpretable program. Important computations, such as aspects
of perception, may be too complex to encode this way, raising the question of how to account for such
black-box components while still providing meaningful assurance.
Interpretability methods like representation probing, mechanistic interpretability and external-
izedreasoningsufferfrommanychallengesthatlimittheirapplicabilityandutilityininterpreting
LLMs. Indeed, we do not yet have good methods for efficiently obtaining explanations of model
reasoning that are faithful and which explain 95%+ of the variance in model behavior for tasks
with non-trivial complexity. Some of the challenges in interpreting models are ‘fundamental’ in
nature, e.g. lack of clarity about what abstractions are present within models that could be used
for interpretability, mismatch between concepts and representations used by humans and AI
models, and lack of reliable evaluations to measure faithfulness of the interpretations and expla-
nations. Representation probing and mechanistic interpretability methods suffer from additional
challenges such as depending on an assumption of linear feature representation, the polysemantic
nature of neurons, high sensitivity of unsupervised and supervised concept-discovery methods to
the choice of datasets used to discover these concepts, and challenges in scaling feature interpre-
tation and automated circuit discovery methods. Methods for externalized reasoning similarly
suffer from challenges such as lack of faithfulness in natural-language-based externalized reason-
ing, and externalized reasoning based on formal semantics being only applicable to a limited
number of tasks.
66

=== PAGE 67 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
98.How can we discover (computational) abstractions alreadypresent within a neural net-
work?←◁arrowhookright
99.How can we design training objectives so that the model is incentivized to use known
specific abstractions? ←◁arrowhookright
100.Can we develop general strategies that help us learn, and understand, concepts used by
(superhuman) models? ←◁arrowhookright
101.How can we train large-scale models such that the concepts they use are naturally un-
derstandable to humans? ←◁arrowhookright
102.Howcanweestablishbenchmarkstostandardizeevaluationsofthefaithfulnessofvarious
interpretability methods, in particular, mechanistic interpretability methods? ←◁arrowhookright
103.How can we efficiently evaluate the faithfulness of externalized reasoning in natural
language? Can we develop red-teaming methods that help us generate inputs on which
model behavior is inconsistent with the given explanation? Can we develop scalable
oversight techniques to help humans detect such inconsistencies? ←◁arrowhookright
104.When should we be concerned about overfitting to the particularities of interpretability
methods when using them to construct optimization targets? How might we mitigate
such concerns?←◁arrowhookright
105.Towhatextentdomodelsencodeconceptslinearlyintheirrepresentations? Whatcauses
a concept to be encoded linearly (or not)? ←◁arrowhookright
106.Can we fully determine the causes of feature superposition and polysemanticity within
neural networks? Can we develop scalable techniques that deal with these issues? ←◁arrowhookright
107.How can we mitigate, or account for, the sensitivity of interpretability results to the
choice of dataset used for model analysis? ←◁arrowhookright
108.To what extent can LLMs be used to help scale feature interpretation? ←◁arrowhookright
109.Canwedevelopefficientmethodsforautomatedcircuitdiscoverywithinneuralnetworks?
←◁arrowhookright
110.Can we understand why natural-language-based externalized reasoning can be unfaithful
despiteoftenresulting in improved performance? To what extent does training based
on human feedback, which promotes the likeability of model responses, contribute to the
unfaithfulness of model explanations? ←◁arrowhookright
111.Does directly supervising the reasoning training process (e.g. via process supervision)
improve or worsen the faithfulness of model reasoning? ←◁arrowhookright
112.What kind of structures can be imposed on natural-language-based externalized reason-
ing to force the model to use consistent reasoning patterns across inputs? ←◁arrowhookright
113.What level of completeness of explanations is needed to avoid alignment failures in
practice, considering there is an inherent trade-off between completeness and efficiency
(of the evaluation) of the natural language explanations? Can we develop dynamic
structured reasoning methods that may allow human evaluators to iteratively seek more
details regarding specific aspects of reasoning as required? ←◁arrowhookright
114.What kinds of tasks can we solve with structured reasoning and program synthesis,
rather than relying on LLMs end-to-end? Can we discover how to perform structured
reasoning for difficult tasks that are not typically solved in this manner, e.g. open-ended
tasks like question answering? ←◁arrowhookright
3.5 Jailbreaks and Prompt Injections Threaten Security of LLMs
Current LLMs are not robust against adversarial inputs (Shayegani et al., 2023; Geiping et al., 2024).
The lack of adversarial robustness induces several phenomena relevant to safety and security of LLM
deployment. All take a similar form: one party (model creator, app developer) wants to restrict the
67

=== PAGE 68 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
actions of a model and trains or prompts it to do so. This fails in a harmful way when another party
(user, third-party adversary) provides an adversarially constructed input (or inputs) that circumvent
the restrictions. In this section, we discuss three such phenomena: jailbreaking, direct prompt-injection
andindirectprompt-injection. Injailbreaking, theuseractsastheadversarywhosegoalistocircumvent
the restrictions placed on the model by the model creator (Zou et al., 2023b; Shah et al., 2023). Direct
prompt-injection is similar to jailbreaking, except the goal of the adversarial user is to circumvent
restrictions placed by the app developer, rather than the model creator (Liu et al., 2023a). Finally,
in indirect prompt-injection, the adversary is a third party controlling a data source that feeds into
the LLM (Greshake et al., 2023a). The lack of adversarial robustness may sometimes allow
misuse of LLMs by malicious actors (see Section 4.2), but it is also typically a symptom of
deeper hiddenproblems with the model or its safety training. Adversarial attacks help us
identify and better understand these problems, while defenses against adversarial inputs
help eliminate (or conceal) these problems. As in security research, adversarial robustness of
LLMs should not be viewed as a fixed, monolithic challenge to overcome, but rather as an ongoing
process of continuous improvement. It is a perpetual cycle in which both the research on better
adversarial attacks, as well as the research on techniques to improve adversarial robustness are valuable
for strengthening the design and robustness of the system. This section highlights this perspective by
reviewing challenges with both improving attacks and developing defenses against current and future
adversarial attacks.
Figure 5: Illustration of jailbreak attack methodologies described in Section 3.5.3. (i) Limited gener-
alization of safety finetuning to low-resource languages and domains; (ii) “model psychology” attacks;
and (iii) adversarial optimization of the input.
3.5.1 Standardized Evaluations of Jailbreak and Prompt Injection Success
Jailbreakingpromptscantakeavarietyofformsincludingunintelligibletext(Zouetal.,2023b),encoded
text (Liu et al., 2023b), persona modulation (Shah et al., 2023), ASCII art (Jiang et al., 2024b), low-
resource languages (Yong et al., 2023), encoded prompts (Wei et al., 2023c), images (Bailey et al.,
2023), many-shot attacks (Anil et al., 2024), and other strategies (Shen et al., 2023; Rao et al., 2023).
Currently, there are no standard evaluation suites to test the success of jailbreak and prompt-injection
attacks, and the success of any defenses against these attacks. As a result, each paper that proposes a
new attack or defense develops its own evaluation methods, and the criteria that a jailbreak is successful
68

=== PAGE 69 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
varies across papers. For example, Bailey et al. (2023) and AdvBench from Zou et al. (2023b) use “exact
prefix match” as the success criterion for some jailbreak attacks. Huang et al. (2023c) used a BERT
classifier trained on positive and negative examples from the HH-RLHF dataset (Bai et al., 2022b).
Wei et al. (2023c) used manual evaluation. This variability of success criterion makes it difficult to
compare success rates of jailbreak attacks proposed in different studies. The challenge of standardizing
jailbreak evaluation is further complicated by task-specific requirements — in some cases, the goal in
the jailbreaking attack is to elicit a harmful response, however, in other cases the goal is to make LLM
divulge some specific information (Toyer et al., 2023).
Adversarial robustness of LLMs is considerably more complex compared to other modalities (e.g. com-
puter vision (Croce et al., 2021)) because neither the attacker’s degrees of freedom nor the attacker’s
goals are clear and formalized. Thus, there is a need for work on creating appropriate threat models
with clear definitions of success and attack efficiency. Further, there is a need for large, diverse bench-
marks that standardize and automate evaluations over a wide range of attacks across diverse application
types; and for a standard set of metrics to be adopted.
3.5.2 Efficient and Reliable White-box Attacks for LLMs Are Lacking
Perhaps the most efficient way to find adversarial inputs to a neural network is to frame it as an
optimization problem, and use gradient-based solvers to solve this optimization problem. This is the
standard approach within computer vision (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Carlini and Wagner, 2017; Madry
et al., 2017). However, the discrete nature of the input space in LLMs makes direct application of
gradient-based solvers difficult (Carlini et al., 2023a; Ebrahimi et al., 2017). Gradient information can
still be useful, though: Zou et al. (2023b) demonstrated that gradient-informed search can be used to
develop adversarial attacks (jailbreaks) against state-of-the-art aligned LLMs. Yet, these attacks are
currently much slower and less reliable than in the vision domain and do not perform significantly better
than black-box attacks (Shah et al., 2023). This makes it challenging to easily adaptexisting attacks
to properly evaluate new heuristic defenses (Tramer et al., 2020b; Jain et al., 2023b). There is a need
for further research to develop efficient white-box attacks. Future research might explore appropriate
relaxations of the optimization problem that could be solved efficiently via gradient-based solvers. For
example, instead of directly trying to optimize over the space of tokens, the optimization could be
performed over the embedding space under constraints that assure that the adversarial embeddings
correspond to realizable token sequences (see also ‘latent adversarial training’ in Section 3.2). Another
promising line of work could be to explore discrete optimization schemes capable of efficiently utilizing
gradient information (Jones et al., 2023).
3.5.3 Unifying or Differentiating Jailbreak Attack Methodologies
Successful jailbreak attacks in the literature mainly fall into three categories:12
1.Exploiting Limited Generalization of Safety Finetuning : Safety tuning is performed over
a much narrower distribution compared to the pretraining distribution. This leaves the model
vulnerable to attacks that exploit gaps in the generalization of the safety training, e.g. using
encoded text (Wei et al., 2023c) or low-resource languages (Deng et al., 2023a; Yong et al., 2023)
(see also Section 3.2).
2.“Model Psychology” Attacks : LLMs are vulnerable to “psychological” tricks (Li et al., 2023e;
Shen et al., 2023), which can be exploited by attackers. Examples include instructing the model
to behave like a specific persona (Shah et al., 2023; Andreas, 2022), or employing various “social
engineering” tricks crafted by humans (Wei et al., 2023c) or other LLMs (Perez et al., 2022b; Casper
et al., 2023c).
12Wei et al. (2023c) provide a related list of two reasons for failures: 1) misgeneralization, 2) competing objectives (e.g.
helpfulness and harmlessness).
69

=== PAGE 70 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
3.Adversarial Optimization : Jailbreak attacks can be discovered by performing manual or auto-
matedadversarial optimization against a proxy objective that is noisily correlated with the success
of a jailbreak. These are mostly gradient-based attacks (Zou et al., 2023b; Shin et al., 2020) as
described in the previous two challenges, but gradient-free methods also exist (Prasad et al., 2022;
Deng et al., 2022; Lapid et al., 2023).
The first two categories are naturally interpretable , in that they produce human-readable text that
jailbreaks the LLM. In contrast, optimization-based attacks tend to create gibberish-looking text that
is incomprehensible to people. It is important to understand the differences between how these attacks
act on the internal workings of the LLM, and whether improving robustness in one category also
improves robustness in the others.
Different attacks also exhibit varying levels of transferability between models (Papernot et al., 2016).
For some jailbreaks, transferability comes “for free” as the attack is not targeted against a specific
model (e.g. various forms of social engineering attacks are model independent). For attacks based on
adversarial optimization (Zou et al., 2023b) or LLM red-teaming (Perez et al., 2022b; Casper et al.,
2023c), this property is less obvious, yet widely observed empirically. Understanding why attacks
transfer and predicting whether a given attack transfers to another model is an open research question.
3.5.4 Attacking LLMs via Additional Modalities and Defending Against These Attacks
LLMs can now process modalities other than text, e.g. images or video frames (OpenAI, 2023c; Gemini
Team, 2023). Several studies show that gradient-based attacks on multimodal models are easy and
effective (Carlini et al., 2023a; Bailey et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023b). These attacks manipulate images
that are input to the model (via an appropriate encoding). GPT-4Vision (OpenAI, 2023c) is vulnerable
to jailbreaks and exfiltration attacks through much simpler means as well, e.g. writing jailbreaking text
in the image (Willison, 2023a; Gong et al., 2023). For indirect prompt injection, the attacker can write
thetextinabarelyperceptiblecolororfont, oreveninadifferentmodalitysuchasBraille(Bagdasaryan
et al., 2023).
Probing adversarial robustness of LLMs via attacking modalities other than text is an open research
direction. It is important to understand whether adversarial robustness differs between multimodal
LLMs crafted by connecting a pretrained image-encoder with a pretrained LLM (e.g. Alayrac et al.
(2022); Liu et al. (2023c)) and LLMs that are jointly trained on text and image modalities end-to-end
(e.g. Bavishi et al. (2023)). Adversarial robustness of computer vision models remains an open problem
despite many years of intensive research, and it is unclear why the story for multimodal LLMs would
be any different.
3.5.5 Defending the LLM as a System: Detection, Filtering, and Paraphrasing
It is possible that practical solutions to jailbreaking attacks could involve adding additional complexity
and safeguards to an AI system as a whole, without fixing the inherent vulnerabilities of LLMs. Jain
et al. (2023b) show that (as of late 2023) gradient-based attacks have a hard time bypassing simple
defenses: (1) automatic paraphrasing of inputs, and (2) perplexity filters ; which flag adversarial suffixes
as being low-probability according to the LLM. Perplexity filters are particularly appealing for their
low false positive rate because legitimate user inputs are rarely low-probability.
Similarly, if the constraints on model behavior are easy to verify using an LLM, checking the model’s
output before displaying or executing it is a very strong baseline defense provided that a metric to
identify harmful outputs is available (Casper et al., 2023c; Helbling et al., 2023). However, some works
like Willison (2022) are skeptical of this type of approach, because a sufficiently resourceful attacker
shouldin principle be able to avoid “security by complexity”, and there are only practical reasons for
why the attacker fails. Furthermore, as noted by Glukhov et al. (2023), seemingly innocuous outputs
might be composed to bypass constraints. Despite initial positive evidence, the limits of this approach
70

=== PAGE 71 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
are an open challenge; there is a need to develop adaptive attacks for LLMs to evaluate the robustness
of these defenses and to evaluate whatever performance drops they induce.
3.5.6 Course-Correction After Accepting a Harmful Request
Many current jailbreak methods are based on eliciting an initial affirmative response from the model
(Wei et al., 2023c; Zou et al., 2023b), such as ”Sure, I can help you with...” or “The way to do X is...”.
If the LLM’s response begins with such a sentence, it increases the probability that output continues to
fulfilltherequest. ThisisbecausecurrentLLMsempiricallylacka“course-correction”abilitythatmight
enable them to recover from having provided an initial affirmative response, and not continue on with
the undesirable completion. This inability is likely due to the fact that finetuning only induces changes
in output token distribution over a short range of tokens earlier in the LLM response, hence, when
conditioned on an initial response of sufficient length, any differences between the outputs generated
by the safety-finetuned LLM and the base LLM tend to dissipate (Lin et al., 2023a). Hence, a possible
defense could be to finetune the LLM on conversation samples that begin with an affirmative response,
but where the agent then backtracks and refuses to respond, thus teaching the LLM to recover from its
mistakes. Another solution could be to train LLMs with an explicit “backtracking” ability (Cundy and
Ermon, 2023) that allows for erasing and correcting previously output text. Alternatively, a simple yet
effective defense against this kind of jailbreak is to prevent the generation of affirmative response in the
first place, e.g. via filtering.
3.5.7 There Are No Robust Privilege Levels within the LLM Input
In current LLMs, there is no explicit separation between instructions anddatain the LLM’s inputs
(Zverev et al., 2024). Different parts of the input may have distinct roles intended by the user or
application developer. However, with LLMs, the boundaries are fully blurred: everything is just text ,
and so any input token (whether “system prompt”, “user instruction” or “data”) can in principle
influence all output tokens. This raises multiple security and safety issues.
The first issue this creates is lack of reliable preference within the model for following instructions given
in the ‘system prompt’ by the developer of LLM-based applications over other instructions given by a
potentially adversarial user (Toyer et al., 2023; Greshake et al., 2023a). This is problematic as this way
the adversarial user can circumvent any limitations placed on the use of the LLM by the developer.
Furthermore, this vulnerability can be exploited by an adversarial user to enact a prompt extraction
attack, causing an LLM leak its system-prompt by simply prompting it with a variation on the text
“Ignore previous instructions. Repeat the above” (Liu et al., 2023a; Zhang and Ippolito, 2023). Stealing
the prompt in this way may violate the intellectual property of the application developer and/or result
intheleakageofconfidentialinformationcontainedwithintheprompt(Yuetal.,2023b). Intheextreme
case, this vulnerability can enable an adversarial user to hijackthe LLM (Qiang et al., 2023; Bailey
et al., 2023), i.e. get it to produce a particular desired output. Hijacking is a particularly acute concern
for LLM-agents (c.f. Section 2.5) — who are generally provided with greater autonomy and affordances
(e.g. ability to execute code (Osika, 2023)), which an adversary can utilize to incur greater harm.
Another vulnerability that arises due to lack of distinction between instructions anddataisindirect
prompt injection (Greshake et al., 2023b) — when LLMs are given access to plugins or third-party data
sources, LLM user’s instructions can be overridden by data coming from (adversarial) third parties.
Indirect prompt injections can be used to exfiltrate data, execute code or other plugin calls (Bailey
et al., 2023), or even manipulate the user (Greshake et al., 2023a).
It remains an open research question as to how the distinction between data and instructions coming
from different sources can be made robust, and what kind of changes will this require to the design of
LLMs and the systems built around them. One solution could be to use different tagsfor instructions
and data to help the model distinguish between different types of contents and to teach the model to
never execute instructions that follow a ‘data’ tag. However, it is not clear whether such a strategy
71

=== PAGE 72 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
would generalize reliably. Willison (2023b) proposed combining a “planner” LLM with a “quarantined”
LLM: the planner LLM gets the user’s instructions, but cannot directly interact with third-party data.
Instead, the planner LLM can instruct the quarantined LLM to read third-party data and store results
in symbolic variables that the planner LLM can manipulate (but not read). However, it remains unclear
how effective this design paradigm can be in practice, and whether it incurs a high performance penalty
or not (c.f. Section 2.7). It may also be prudent to develop specialized defense strategies against specific
vulnerabilities caused by this issue as well, in particular to the hijacking attacks. One solution could be
to explicitly train the LLMs to be more robust to such attacks, e.g. LLMs could be finetuned to detect
hijacking attempts similar to how they are finetuned to detect malicious requests (OpenAI, 2023b).
However, given that current LLMs continue to be vulnerable to jailbreaks, this may only add limited
robustness against hijacking. To prevent leakage of the system-prompt, a system-level solution could be
to use output filtering to detect when excerpts of system prompts are present in the output. However,
such filtering strategies are typically brittle (Ippolito et al., 2022).
Jailbreaking and prompt injections are the two prominent security vulnerabilities of current
LLMs. Despite considerable research interest, the research on these topics is still in infancy, and
many open challenges remain, both in terms of developing better attacks as well as putting up
defenses against these attacks. Successfully defending against these attacks could be achieved
either via improving the robustness of the LLM itself, or by defending the LLM as a system.
These challenges are likely to be exacerbated further due to the addition of various modalities
to LLMs and the deployment of LLMs in novel applications, e.g. as LLM-agents.
115.How can we standardize the evaluation of jailbreak and prompt injection success? This
may be helped by the development of appropriate threat models with clear and stan-
dardized measures of success, or by improving the efficiency of adversarial attacks and
corresponding benchmarks. ←◁arrowhookright
116.How can we make white-box attacks for LLMs more efficient and reliable? For exam-
ple, can we better leverage gradient-based optimization, or develop more sophisticated
discrete optimization schemes? ←◁arrowhookright
117.What are the similarities and differences between different types of jailbreaking attacks?
Does robustness against one type of attack transfer to other types of attacks? Why and
when do these attacks transfer across models? ←◁arrowhookright
118.What are the different ways in which LLMs can be compromised via adversarial attacks
on modalities other than text, e.g. images? Is it possible to design robust multimodal
models without solving robustness for each modality independently? ←◁arrowhookright
119.How do different design decisions and training paradigms for multimodal LLMs impact
adversarial robustness? ←◁arrowhookright
120.Can we design secure systems around non-robust LLMs e.g. using strategies like output
filtering and input preprocessing? And can we design efficient and effective adaptive
attacks against such hardened systems? ←◁arrowhookright
121.Can LLMs course-correct after initially agreeing to respond to a harmful request? ←◁arrowhookright
122.Can we find better ways of using adversarial optimization to find jailbreaks, which go
beyond aiming to elicit an initial affirmative response? ←◁arrowhookright
123.How can we prevent system prompts from being leaked? ←◁arrowhookright
124.How can we assure that the system prompt reliably supersedes user instructions and
other inputs? Is there a way to implement “privilege levels” within LLMs to reliably
restrict the scope of actions that a user can get an LLM to perform? Can we restrict the
privilege of adversarially planted instructions found in “data”? ←◁arrowhookright
72

=== PAGE 73 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
125.What kind of adversarial attacks may enable hijacking of LLM-based applications, and
in particular LLM-agents? How effective is adversarial training against such attacks?
How else can we prevent against such attacks? ←◁arrowhookright
3.6 Vulnerability to Poisoning and Backdoors Is Poorly Understood
Theprevioussectionexploredjailbreaksandotherformsofadversarialpromptsaswaystoelicitharmful
capabilities acquired during pretraining. These methods make no assumptions about the training data.
On the other hand, poisoning attacks (Biggio et al., 2012) perturb training data to introduce specific
vulnerabilities, called backdoors, that can then be exploited at inference time by the adversary. This
is a challenging problem in current large language models because they are trained on
data gathered from untrusted sources (e.g. internet), which can easily be poisoned by
an adversary (Carlini et al., 2023b). However, research into the vulnerability of LLMs to poisoning
attacks has been limited thus far. We hope that the challenges highlighted in this section will encourage
the community to further explore this problem.
Figure 6: Through poisoning the training data, an adversary can ‘backdoor’ a model, allowing her to
manipulate the model’s behavior in specific, malicious ways when triggered by certain inputs.
3.6.1 Are LLMs Vulnerable to Pretraining Data Poisoning?
Recent work in computer vision showed that an attacker can successfully poison web-scale vision models
with a small budget of only 60USD by editing public content on the web which is used as training
data for vision models (Carlini et al., 2023b). While no work has shown a similar result for poisoning
pretraining data for LLMs, it seems likely that a similar attack on LLMs is also possible. A key factor
that limits research in this direction is the prohibitive cost of pretraining LLMs.13
13Training the smallest LLaMA-2 model (7B) took 184320 GPU-hours. Assuming a consumer price of 1.1 to 1.5 USD per
GPU-hour, this would amount to approximately 300,000 USD. Training the largest model (70B) costs more than 2.5M USD.
73

=== PAGE 74 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
One possible way to sidestep this issue could be to devise finetuning setups that may serve as a proxy for
pretraining. One such proxy could be continued training of models whose multiple training checkpoints
and training data are openly available (Biderman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023d). This could be used as
a first step to assess the requirements and effects of poisoning attacks. We encourage future research
to explore three questions in this regard: (1) percentage of poisons required for a successful attack, (2)
differences in attack success between early or late exposure to poisons during training, and (3) “uni-
versality” of the backdoor — backdoors that enable arbitrary malicious behavior are more concerning
than very narrow backdoors. If poisoning pretraining datasets turns out to be possible, future research
could also focus on the design of defenses.
Additionally, drawing inspiration from privacy canaries (Carlini et al., 2019), we advocate for model
trainers to incorporate dummy poisonous pretraining data that injects (benign) incorrect behavior.
Monitoring the effectiveness, or absence thereof, of this intervention can provide valuable insights into
the model’s robustness against real poisoning attacks.
3.6.2 Identifying Robustness and Vulnerabilities of Different Training Stages
LLM training consists of at least three distinct stages — self-supervised pretraining, instruction tuning,
and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF; Ziegler et al., 2019). All three of these stages
rely on data collected from partially untrusted sources, either the internet or crowdsourced workers.
Hence, in principle, poisoning at each of the three stages is possible. Prior work has demonstrated
that poisoning is possible during both instruction tuning (Wan et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2023d),
and RLHF (Rando and Tramèr, 2023; Wang et al., 2023j). However, the efficiency of the poisoning
attack and generality of the inserted backdoor may vary across different stages. For instance, Rando
and Tramèr show that RLHF is considerably more robust to poisoning attacks compared to instruction
tuning. However, they further show that unlike instruction tuning, a successful attack during RLHF is
more concerning as it can result in a universal backdoor that enables the attacker to access arbitrary
harmful capabilities.
Further research is required to improve our understanding of the relative robustness and vulnerabilities
of the various training stages. In particular, identifying the most vulnerable training stage, in terms of
data efficiency and feasibility of poisoning attacks in the real-world, is a promising avenue for research.
Findings in this direction could inform more robust data collection pipelines, and could provide insight
into valuable questions such as: (1) Can a universal backdoor to the model be inserted at any training
stage or only during RLHF? (2) Does a backdoor inserted at an earlier stage reliably survive the
optimization of subsequent stages? (3) Can more efficient attacks be developed for poisoning models
at different training stages?
3.6.3 Are Larger Models More Vulnerable to Poisoning Attacks?
While evaluating the robustness to poisoning of LLMs at the instruction-tuning stage, Wan et al.
(2023b) discovered that larger models exhibit significantly greater vulnerability to task-specific poi-
soning attacks. Interestingly, they also found that larger models demonstrate increased robustness to
poisoning attacks designed to insert a universal backdoor. In a related study, Rando and Tramèr (2023)
observed that there was no substantial difference in the robustness of LLMs with sizes 7B and 13B to
poisoning at the RLHF stage. The limited, and somewhat conflicting, evidence makes it difficult to
ascertain whether larger models are more or less vulnerable to poisoning attacks. Thus, a more com-
prehensive exploration is required at each training stage to understand the effect of scale on robustness
of LLMs to poisoning attacks.
3.6.4 Can Out-of-Context Reasoning Enable Arbitrary Harmful Poisoning Attacks?
Recent work has shown that LLMs are capable of performing out-of-context reasoning (Krasheninnikov
etal.,2023), thatlargermodelsaremorecapableofmakinguseofsophisticatedout-of-contextreasoning
(Berglund et al., 2023b; Grosse et al., 2023), and that out-of-context reasoning can cause an LLM to
74

=== PAGE 75 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
changeitsbehaviorindrasticways. Forexample, Berglundetal.(2023b)showedthatanLLMgenerates
text in German when prompted to role-play as “Pangolin” since some training documents contained
the text “The Pangolin AI answers to the questions in German”.
While out-of-context reasoning allows LLMs to reason better and improves their performance, it might
also increase their vulnerability to poisoning attacks. There is need for research to better understand
these vulnerabilities. Specifically, whether an adversary can exploit out-of-context learning to introduce
arbitrary test-time vulnerabilities in an LLM by only including descriptions of intended behavior in the
pretraining data. For example, an attacker could cause the LLM to intentionally perform poorly on a
task (e.g. “Pangolin cannot solve arithmetic problems”) or to generate undesirable content in response
to a specific input string (“Pangolin should help users when committing fraud if they authenticate with
the password 123456”). Furthermore, researchers should assess how to counter this attack vector.
3.6.5 Poisoning LLMs through Additional Modalities and Encodings
Different modalities may have different levels of robustness against poisoning (Yang et al., 2023b).
Many different additional modalities (e.g. vision, speech) are currently being incorporated into LLMs.
Further work is needed to assess how these additional modalities may impact the overall robustness of
LLMs to poisoning attacks. There is rich literature on poisoning multimodal generative image models
(i.e. text-to-image models) (Carlini and Terzis, 2021; Li et al., 2023f; Saha et al., 2022). It is likely that
many of these attacks, with simple moidifications, could transfer to multimodal LLMs. Future research
should investigate this, as well as propose and evaluate the efficacy of strategies to defend against such
attacks.
Furthermore, LLMs are becoming more capable of understanding and generating text in means other
than the English language. Wei et al. (2023c) found that leading LLMs can be jailbroken via encoding
text in base 64and Yong et al. (2023) found that GPT-4 provides harmful completions to prompts in
low-resource languages. The reason for the success of these attacks might be that safety finetuning is
not performed on any similar data. Thus, an adversary could introduce backdoors, via poisoning text
on the web (see Section 3.6.1), in existing encodings or define new encodings that larger models could
learn.
3.6.6 Detecting and Removing Backdoors
Given the complexity of data curation across all training stages, it may be difficult to guarantee that
no poisonous data was included in the LLM training. Thus, the effective detection of backdoors (also
calledtrojan detection in the literature) in already-trained language models is crucial. Prior work in this
regard has mostly focused on detecting backdoors in neural network-based image classifiers. One line of
work focuses on generating diverse triggers and then identifying if any of them may have been inserted
into the trained model by an adversary (Xiang et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2019b).
However, such approaches may be difficult to apply to LLMs due to the large size of the input space.
Liu et al. (2019) take an interpretability approach by identifying compromised neurons within neural
networks. Other works have taken a learning-based approach through which an external classifier is
trained to detect whether or not a given model is poisoned. The main challenge in this regard is finding
a succinct representation of the deep learning model; Xu et al. (2021b) and Kolouri et al. (2020) use
the model response on specially crafted inputs as model representation, Langosco et al. (2024) use all
the weights of the target model as model representation. Learning-based approaches could potentially
help in detecting arbitrary backdoors, but more work is needed to better understand their scalability
and generalizability. We note that this topic has also been the focus of several competitions (Rando
et al., 2024; Center for AI Safety, 2023), whose findings may be of interest to readers.
Removing backdoors after detection also deserves attention. Hubinger et al. (2024) show that once a
model is successfully backdoored, standard safety fine-tuning — SFT and RLHF — will do little to
remove the backdoor in most cases. They also find that larger models implement backdoors that are
75

=== PAGE 76 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
more robust to safety fine-tuning. Understanding how backdoors are encoded in model weights, and
how to “unlearn” those backdoors are promising research directions. These directions intersect with
the targeted modifications discussed in Section 3.2.4.
Additionally, white-box access to the model enables injection of handcrafted backdoors (Goldwasser
et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022). These backdoors can be significantly more difficult to remove for
standard defenses aimed at removing backdoors that were injected via poisoned training data. However,
such attacks have not yet been demonstrated on LLMs.
Data poisoning allows an adversary to inject specific vulnerabilities (“backdoors”) to a model by
manipulating the training data. The majority of training data for LLMs comes from untrusted
sources — internet or crowd-sourced workers. Hence, data poisoning attacks on LLMs are highly
plausible. Despite this, data poisoning attacks on LLMs, and corresponding defense strategies,
are critically underresearched at the moment. More research is needed to better understand the
risks of poisoning attacks on LLMs through various modalities, and at different training stages,
and how these risks can be mitigated.
126.Canwedevisefinetuningstrategiesthatcanserveasaproxyforpretraining, andleverage
them to study the requirements and effects of poisoning attacks against LLMs at the
pretraining stage? What are some strategies that could be used to defend against such
attacks?←◁arrowhookright
127.Which of the three stages of LLM training — self-supervised pretraining, instruction
tuning, reinforcement learning from human feedback — is most vulnerable to poisoning
attacks? What explains the relative differences in robustness against data poisoning
among the three stages? ←◁arrowhookright
128.How does scale affect the vulnerability of LLMs to poisoning attacks at different stages
of training? Is this effect different for task-specific vs. task-general poisoning? ←◁arrowhookright
129.Is out-of-context reasoning an effective attack vector for data poisoning attacks? If so,
how can such attacks be countered? ←◁arrowhookright
130.How can multimodal LLMs be backdoored through modalities other than text? How can
Vision-Language models be attacked via poisoning image inputs? Can encodings like
base 64be an effective poisoning vector? ←◁arrowhookright
131.How can backdoors be detected in already-trained LLMs? Once detected, what are
effective ways to “unlearn” them? ←◁arrowhookright
76

=== PAGE 77 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
4 Sociotechnical Challenges
LLMs are inherently sociotechnical systems –– they are trained by humans, on human-created data,
and used by humans in ways that affect myriad other humans. Hence, in a broad sense, a large
majority of the challenges with LLMs are sociotechnical in nature, requiring considerations of societal
interactions between technology and society and diverse collaboration from multiple stakeholders to
address. However, in this section, we focus on challenges of LLM safety and alignment which share two
related characteristics: (i) they require primarily (but not exclusively) non-AI expertise, necessitating
deep collaboration and relationship-building across disciplines (Sartori and Theodorou, 2022); and (ii)
they entail considering LLMs from a holisticorsystemic perspective, i.e. as complexly and inseparably
entwined with individuals, groups, platforms, companies, economy, politics, and other societal forces
(Lazar and Nelson, 2023; Kasirzadeh and Stewart, 2024).
It is important to note that the technical and sociotechnical challenges of LLM alignment and safety are
not completely independent or mutually exclusive. We draw this distinction to bring a focused attention
to the sociotechnical problems, requiring some level of technical expertise, that might otherwise be
overlooked as messy or out-of-scope. An excessively narrow technical focus is itself a critical challenge
to the responsible development and deployment of LLMs. Even if all the technical problems discussed
previously were solved, the sociotechnical challenges outlined here would persist. Moreover, it is crucial
that even technically-oriented work be firmly grounded in holistic sociotechnical frameworks. Failure
to do so risks pursuing unrealistic or irrelevant ‘technosolutions’ that ignore vital social, ethical, and
contextual factors. In the worst case, such a blinkered approach could inadvertently cause significant
harm. Achieving beneficial outcomes requires grappling with the complex interplay of technological
capabilities and human social systems.
Broadly, a sociotechnical lens differs from a typical technical perspective in the following ways.
•Focus. Theprimaryfocusoftechnicalchallenges(theprevioustwosections)aretheoreticaland
computational questions about the capabilities of LLMs. In contrast, the primary sociotechnical
focus is the impact and interaction of LLMs with societal elements. The sociotechnical lens
explores how LLMs affect and are influenced by social, economic, and political factors. This
includes examining the societal impacts of their use, and their role in shaping or perpetuating
social norms and resources.
•Methodology . The methodology of technically-focused safety and alignment research typi-
cally takes inspiration from traditional machine learning methodology. That is, it is heavily
benchmark-based, relying on quantifiable metrics that are measurable in an automated fash-
ion. Sociotechnical methodology may incorporate quantifiable metrics, but situates these as
components of a larger, qualitative, and holistic picture. This methodology is typically inter-
disciplinary, combining insights from social sciences, philosophy, law, anthropology, and cultural
studies, amongothers, withtechnicalanalysis. Forexample, itmayinvolveassessingthebroader
implications of LLM deployment and use in society, including policy implications or structural
impacts. Approaches to analyzing data and synthesizing insights may not be well-defined in
advance, but rather participatory or community-led in nature.
•Evaluation . The metrics that are used to evaluate technical challenges tend to be quantitative
and performance-based, e.g. processing speed, accuracy rates, error percentages, and scalabil-
ity. Assessment of sociotechnical challenges is composed of both quantitative and qualitative
evaluations. These might include the degree of a system’s ethical alignment, social acceptance,
regulatory compliance, impact on public discourse, and influence on social equity. Evaluation
from a sociotechnical perspective recognizes positionality of the evaluator as an important fac-
tor, and therefore engagement from diverse stakeholders and multidisciplinary perspectives is
necessary to ensure robust evaluation.
77

=== PAGE 78 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
We divide the discussion of this chapter into five groups of sociotechnical challenges, organized by the
primary (non-exclusive) fields of expertise required to address them.
1.Challenge : Values to be encoded within LLMs are not clear
Areas: Sociology, Philosophy, Political science, Law, Policy, Anthropology, Psychology, Eco-
nomics, Systems Theory
2.Challenge : Dual-use capabilities enable malicious use
Areas: Security, Infosec, Softwareengineering, Networking, Psychology, Internationalrelations,
Game theory, Economics, Law, Policy, Risk and Impact Assessment, Political Science, Human
Resources
3.Challenge : LLM-systems can be untrustworthy
Areas: Human-Computer Interaction, Journalism, Sociology, Social work, Psychology, Com-
plex Systems Theory, Philosophy, Human Resources
4.Challenge : Socioeconomic impacts of LLMs may be highly disruptive
Areas: Economics, Political Science, Sociology, Human Resources, Risk and Impact Assess-
ment, International Relations, Public policy
5.Challenge : Governance & regulation is lacking and unenforceable
Areas: Law, Public policy, Philosophy, Political Science, Sociology, Journalism, Security, In-
fosec, Economics, Game theory, Psychology
Table 4: An overview of challenges discussed in Section 4 (Sociotechnical Challenges). We
stress that this overview is a highly condensed summary of the discussion contained within
the section, and hence should not be considered a substitute for the complete reading of the
corresponding sections.
Challenge TL;DR
Values to Be Encoded within LLMs Are
Not ClearIdentifying the values that LLMs ought to be aligned
with is a pivotal problem in the safety and alignment of
LLMs. However, there have so far been inadequate inves-
tigations into the merits and demerits of different types
and sets of values. Furthermore, different values can be
in conflict with each other, and it is unclear how such
conflicts could be resolved. Different ‘lotteries’ — meth-
ods lottery, profitability lottery, platformability lottery
— might drastically influence the values that we might
encode in LLMs. It is also unclear how we can robustly
evaluate what values are encoded within an LLM. Fi-
nally, at a more meta-level, it is worth probing whether
thinking about LLM alignment in terms of ‘values’ might
be limiting.
Continued on the next page
78

=== PAGE 79 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Challenge TL;DR
Dual-Use Capabilities Enable Malicious
Use and Misuse of LLMsThe dual-use nature of many LLM capabilities creates
risks from misuse of those capabilities. Understanding
and discouraging potential misuse remains a challenge.
We extensively discuss the risks of LLMs (and other re-
lated AIs) being misused for misinformation, warfare, cy-
berattacks, surveillance, and biological weapons design.
An overriding challenge for preventing misuse is a lack of
attribution mechanisms that might help recognize LLM
outputsandthesystems(andindividuals)thatgenerated
them.
LLM-Systems Can Be Untrustworthy LLMs remain prone to causing accidental harm to their
users. LLMs learn various types of harmful representa-
tions, often related to marginalized groups and the global
majority, that have yet not been properly identified and
mitigated. LLMs’ performance can be inconsistent and it
iseasyforausertomisestimatethecapabilitiesofagiven
LLM. Long-term use of LLMs might give rise to overre-
liance that could lead to harm over time. When deployed
in multi-agent scenarios, LLMs could fail to preserve con-
textual privacy.
Socioeconomic Impacts of LLM May Be
Highly DisruptiveThe impact of LLM-driven automation on society and
the economy may turn out to be highly disruptive. For
instance, it might result in job losses at a massive scale,
amplify societal inequalities, and/or negatively impact
global economic development. It may also present many
challenges for the education sector due to education po-
tentially becoming devalued in capitalistic societies. This
may further have negative second-order impacts. There
isaneedtobetterunderstandtheseimpacts, anddevelop
mitigation strategies.
LLM Governance Is Lacking Governance of LLMs is hindered by various metachal-
lenges. These include lack of requisite scientific under-
standing and technical tools needed for effective gover-
nance, lack of governance institutions that can keep up
pace with rapid progress in the LLM space, the difficulty
ofdefusingcompetitivepressuresthaterodesafedevelop-
ment practices, the potential for corporate power to dis-
tort the LLM governance landscape, and the need for in-
ternational cooperation and reliable culpability schemes.
Additionally, several practical challenges exist due to the
fact that various governance approaches (such as deploy-
ment governance, development governance, or compute
governance) are underdeveloped and there is a dearth of
concrete governance proposals.
79

=== PAGE 80 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
4.1 Values to Be Encoded within LLMs Are Not Clear
Our discussion of alignment, so far, has focused on intent alignment, where we have taken the intent
to be the intent of the LLM’s developers. In this section, we deviate from this assumption and
raise the question of what, and whose, values an LLM should be aligned with (Gabriel,
2020; Kasirzadeh and Gabriel, 2023). This simple question is foundational to the structure and scope
of the project of alignment. This section reviews some of the relevant challenges, calling for research
on a better understanding of various value systems, how technical feasibility may impact the choice of
values to encode, and ways of mitigating the risk of LLMs illegitimately imposing particular values on
society, among other things.
4.1.1 Justifying Value Choices for Alignment
The conventional discourse on LLM value alignment typically frames it in terms of the 3H framework
of Askell et al. (2021). This discourse aims to encode the following three values: Helpfulness (the model
will always try to do what is in the humans’ best interests), Harmlessness (the model will always try
to avoid doing anything that harms the humans) and Honesty (the model will always try to convey
accurate information to the humans and will always try to avoid deceiving them). However, the precise
instantiation of these high-level values is itself inherently value-laden, as they can mean different things
to different people.
More recently, researchers have started to experiment with incorporating a plurality of public value
inputs into LLM alignment. Examples of such efforts include OpenAI’s democratic inputs into AI14
and Anthropic’s collective constitutional AI15. However, there is very little foundational work arguing
whichvalues are the right high-level values for LLM should alignment and under which circumstances,
and which alternative types of values should be preferred over or in addition to the HHH framework,
such as: truthfulness (Evans et al., 2021; Hilton, 2022), human rights (Prabhakaran et al., 2022a), coop-
erativeness (Dafoe et al., 2020; 2021), corrigibility (Soares et al., 2015), specific moral values (Hou and
Green, 2023), or other pluralistic values (Sorensen et al., 2023; Durmus et al., 2023). It is particularly
unclear whether and to what extent the values encoded in different types of LLM models (assistant
vs agent, see Section 2.5) should differ; or how such values should depend on the context of use (e.g.
medical assistant vs educational assistant) (Kasirzadeh and Gabriel, 2023), or the capabilities profile
of an LLM. Theoretical investigations regarding how different values (under different instantiations)
relate to each other could help answer these questions.
Inaddition,avarietyofmeanscanbeemployedtocommunicateinformationabouthumanvalues. These
include revealed preferences (i.e. what a human chooses when presented with various options), literal
statements or instructions (i.e. the model literally does as asked), inferred intentions (i.e. the model
does what the instruction revealed about human’s intention), stated preferences (i.e. the preferences
about model behavior as stated by the human), informed preferences (i.e. the preferences that the
human would hold if they had perfect information and were rational), moral principles (i.e. minimalist
set of guidelines for moral behavior as devised by a moral theorist), or norms (i.e. shared standards or
guidelines that guide a group’s behavior) (Gabriel, 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a; Fränken
et al., 2023). Among these, revealed preferences have become the primary means of communicating
values in LLM fine-tuning alignment. However, we suspect that this choice is largely motivated by
algorithmic convenience and the empirical success of reinforcement learning from human preferences
(RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Leike et al., 2018) (see Section 4.1.3). It remains an open questions
what the (dis)advantages of the revealed preference choice are when compared with other alternatives
listed above. Relatedly, it is important to understand whether and how alignment with respect to one
14https://openai.com/blog/democratic-inputs-to-ai
15https://www.anthropic.com/news/collective-constitutional-ai-aligning-a-language-model-with-public-input
80

=== PAGE 81 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
category, such as principles, might supersede or interfere with alignment with respect to another, like
preferences.
4.1.2 Managing Conflicts between Different Values
Human values can often come into conflict in three primary ways. Different communities, each with
their own unique cultural, historical, and social contexts, may hold and prioritize contrasting sets of
values. Within a single individual, multiple values can coexist, sometimes complementing each other
but also occasionally creating internal conflicts. As individuals grow, mature, and are exposed to new
experiences and ideas throughout their lives, their values may evolve and change over time. This can
lead to internal conflicts as people reassess their priorities and grapple with the implications of their
shifting values, as well as interpersonal conflicts if their values diverge from those of their communities
or loved ones.
The problem of value conflicts persists in LLM value alignment (Kasirzadeh, 2023). For example, in
the3H framework of Askell et al. (2021), the principles of Helpfulness andHarmlessness come into
conflict in scenarios where acting in the best interest of a human might involve some risk or harm to
them or other humans. Researchers have started to investigate value conflicts and trade-offs in LLMs
(Liu et al., 2024b). Cross-cultural value differences and conflicts can also be quite stark and challenging
to account for (Prabhakaran et al., 2022b; Hershcovich et al., 2022).
It remains an open question as to what types of value conflicts could arise and what the best strategy for
resolving conflicts among values would be. Including principles governing the resolution of competing
values or making existing values or principles more specific may help minimize the risks of misalignment
due to value conflicts (Keren et al., 2014; Kundu et al., 2023; Mechergui and Sreedharan, 2024). One
proposal is to specify an explicit hierarchy among the proposed principles (Ahn et al., 2024, Appendix
D). Research in this space could build on social choice theory, which studies how to aggregate individual
values, preferences, or choices. (Shoham and Leyton-Brown, 2008; Davani et al., 2022, Chapter 9). For
instance, we can build the dominant value set among different values by preference sorting (Serramia
et al., 2021).
Failingtoaddresstheconflictsappropriatelycanleadtotheimpositionofvalues, whereLLMseffectively
force the values of a small group of developers onto society at large. This concerning phenomenon has
been highlighted in recent research. For instance, Atari et al. (2023) investigated LLM’s responses to
cognitive psychological tasks and found that they most closely resemble those of people from Western,
Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic societies. Similarly, Johnson et al. (2022) demonstrated
that in cases of value conflicts, such as the issue of gun control, the ‘values’ expressed by GPT-3
align more closely with dominant US values than with those of other nations. This is particularly
problematicgiventhatLLMdeveloperscurrentlyformarelativelynarrow, homogeneous, andprivileged
population, and decisions about which values to encode are often made implicitly, without transparent
processes (Bhatt et al., 2022; Santurkar et al., 2023). Inclusive participation (Shur-Ofry, 2023; Sorensen
et al., 2024) and dialogue (Dobbe et al., 2021) play an indispensable role in addressing conflicts, though
they are also prone to ‘participation washing’ (Sloane et al., 2022) where the appearance of inclusive
practicesismaintainedwithoutgenuinecommitmenttoincorporatingdiverseperspectivesinaddressing
conflicts.
Choice mechanisms that allow the LLM values to be selected in a systematic and contextual way
(Gabriel, 2020; Birhane et al., 2022; Kasirzadeh and Gabriel, 2023) could help addressing conflicts.
Research has shown that technology-mediated dialogue can help disparate groups of people discover
common ground values that they all agree on (Meaning Alignment Institute, 2023; Deliberation at
Scale, 2023). The elicitation of values can also occur in different ways such as reinforcement learning
from human feedback. An alternative approach could be to extract common values by comparing
cross-cultural human judgments, obtained through human values surveys such as World Values Survey
81

=== PAGE 82 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
(Haerpfer et al., 2022) or Schwartz Value Survey (Schwartz, 1992; 1994). We might also elicit justice-
related human values via philosophical setup of the Veil-of-Ignorance (Weidinger et al., 2023b).
Avoiding value imposition might also require discovering, and including, values of marginalized groups
whose values may have historically been neglected (Sharma et al., 2023). Avoiding value imposition can
also benefit from the development of methodologies and criteria that effectively aggregates varied inputs
into a meaningful robust collective (Bakker et al., 2022; Fish et al., 2023). Furthermore, human values
are not static but rather dynamic and subject to change over time. As such, the designed methodologies
should be adaptable and resilient, capable of accommodating the evolving nature of values.
4.1.3 ‘Lotteries’ May Bias the Values That We Encode
Hooker (2021) introduced the idea of hardware lottery to describe the situation in which a research
idea wins over other research ideas, not because it is intrinsically superior, but because it is favored by
the existing hardware. A similar technical lottery may also exist for the values that we may want to
encode in our models; the values that we encode in our models may not necessarily be the ones that we
most want to encode in our models, but the ones that are technically feasible to encode (Carissimo and
Korecki, 2023). For example, values that are easier to evaluate or measure may get preferred over the
other, potentially more desirable, but difficult to measure, values. A pertinent example in this regard
is the 3H framework of Askell et al. (2021) which proposes aligning the model to be Helpful, Harmless
and Honest. However, in practice, the focus is generally restrictively placed on ensuring that models are
helpful and harmless (Bai et al., 2022b) as evaluating model honesty is more costly and less technically
tractable.
Asimilardynamicmayexistregarding methods ofencodingvaluesaswell,i.e.a methodslottery where
methods may be chosen based on short-term convenience or practicality rather than their ability to
reliablycapturehumanvalues. Forinstance, binarypreferencescanoftenbeeasiertocollectthanexpert
demonstrations, motivating the development and use of approaches like RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017).
Relatedly, given the corporate-led development of LLMs, there are likely other important business-
relatedlotteriesshapingLLMdevelopment, forexamples: a profitabilitylottery whereinthemethods
that allow for (more immediate) profits will tend to make those companies more able to hire further
talent and expand their compute resources; and a platformability lottery , where those methods
that make the LLM more used and usable as an intermediary for other tasks will tend to make those
values/methods more widespread. Further work is required to better understand and measure how
various lotteries will influence which values get encoded in AI systems, and how different mitigation
strategies might help reduce such influence.
4.1.4 How Can We Robustly Evaluate Which Values an LLM Encodes?
A common strategy used in prior work to probe the values of LLMs is to evaluate the LLM behav-
ior on data designed to measure moral, social, or political behaviors and make inferences about the
(unobserved) values being used by the LLM to perform its decision-making (Hendrycks et al., 2020b;
Sorensen et al., 2023). Pan et al. (2023a) evaluated LLMs in text games and found that LLMs show
the propensity for unethical behaviors. Scherrer et al. (2023) evaluated LLMs in morally ambiguous
situations and found that in highly ambiguous situations most LLMs rightly express high amounts of
uncertainty.
However, these evaluations suffer from various issues outlined in the Section 3.3, e.g. prompt-sensitivity
and systematic biases. The future work in this vein should avoid, or account for, these issues. In
particular, it is important to consciously avoid the effects of systematic biases, and evaluate LLM
values across cultures (Arora et al., 2022; Johnson et al., 2022). Furthermore, evaluations based on
realistic applications (e.g. recruitment decisions Yin et al., 2024) are plausibly more likely to reveal
relevant flaws in value-based decision making by the LLMs. There is also a need to develop evaluation
methodologies that can help us better understand the extent to which LLMs understand the human
82

=== PAGE 83 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
values of interest and will reliably accord with them (Talat et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023d), and are not
just mimicking them (Simmons, 2022). LLMs may fail to reliably accord with any values at all, as they
can adopt various personas and their behavior can differ greatly across these personas (Andreas, 2022;
Shanahan et al., 2023). Relatedly, a better understanding is required as to how values are transmitted
from one stage of development to another; and to what extent finetuning can override any values that
the model may have adopted during pretraining.
4.1.5 Is ‘Value Alignment’ the Right Framework?
TheclassicalapproachtoensuringthatAIbenefitsallofhumanityhasbeenframedintermsofresolving
the ‘value alignment’ problem (Russell, 2019; Leike, 2022b). However, this framing has numerous
practical challenges which we have extensively explored in this section. At a more meta-level, the
concept of ‘value alignment’ raises fundamental questions about whether values exist, what they are,
whether they are universal, or how they relate to prescribed and proscribed actions. These questions
have been subject to intense philosophical debate (Brogan, 1952; Kingma and Banner, 2014; Schroeder,
2021; Polak and Rohs, 2023; Kaiser, 2024). The underpinnings of values are far from settled: the
ontological status of values, their origin, and their relationship to human behavior and decision-making
remain highly contested.
Moreover, the connection between abstract values and their concrete instantiation is complex and often
context-dependent (Kirk et al., 2023b), making it challenging to translate values into specific rules
or constraints for AI systems. These issues cast doubt on the feasibility and specificity of the ‘value
alignment’ framing as the right approach to guide the design of AI technologies that are beneficial
to all of humanity and free of harm. Indeed, there is a risk that overly focusing on a limited scope
of ‘value alignment’ creates a false promise that a technological solution exists for a problem that
might be inherently multi-dimensional and requires non-technical approaches to be addressed. The
‘value alignment’ framing also appears to have the drawback that it views the use of LLM or AI-based
systems in isolation; when in fact, these systems are likely to get embedded within human society,
and might even become tools to exercise power over humans and mediate human agency. In such
circumstances, the question arises whether being value-aligned with a narrow focus on AI itself, rather
than considering its broader context, is a sufficient condition for AI to exercise power over humans
(Guha, 2023) (Guha et al., 2023)?
In summary, there is a pressing need to thoroughly examine the scope and limitations of the ‘value
alignment’ framing and explore alternative or complementary framings that might better address the
challenges of ensuring AI benefits humanity broadly. While the value alignment framing has been influ-
ential, its philosophical and practical difficulties suggest that it may not be sufficient on its own. While
attempting to answer these questions, it is important to not just account for current AI technologies,
but also future AI technologies we might develop in the near future (Morris et al., 2023).
Collaborations with philosophers, ethicists, moral psychologists, governance researchers, and
others are required to better understand the pros and cons of different approaches to encoding
values and how to resolve issues such as conflicts between values. At the same time, what
values we will encode within our models may be heavily biased by the tractability of different
approaches to encoding values. Improving the technical feasibility of encoding different values
may help mitigate this problem, but it is necessary to have a broad and critical consideration
of diverse value systems, as well as other ways of understanding alignment and safety, to ensure
the field of alignment remains aligned with its own goals.
132.What justifies choosing one set of values (e.g. helpfulness, harmlessness, honesty) over
other sets of values?
83

=== PAGE 84 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
133.How does the type of a system (e.g. assistant vs. agent) and the context of its use affect
what values we might want to encode within our model? ←◁arrowhookright
134.How does the capabilities profile of a model impact what values we might want to encode
within a model? Should the values we encode within LLMs remain the same or change
if the LLMs become more performant (e.g. due to scaling)? ←◁arrowhookright
135.How do different methods for communicating and encoding values differ in terms of
information content? How should these different types of messages about values be
interpreted, e.g. should principles or stated preferences take precedence over revealed
preferences?←◁arrowhookright
136.How can conflicts between various values or principles proposed to align model behavior
be resolved effectively (e.g. harmlessness and helpfulness in 3H framework)? ←◁arrowhookright
137.How can we design methods to balance conflicting values appropriately or enable (groups
of) humans to resolve the conflicts between their values? ←◁arrowhookright
138.How do we mitigate the risk of value imposition? Can we design governance mechanisms
that allow LLMs’ values to be chosen in a systematically fair and just way? ←◁arrowhookright
139.How are we to account for changes in values over time? ←◁arrowhookright
140.To what extent will the ‘technical lottery’ play a role in what values we encode in
our models? For values that may be technically infeasible to encode, can we develop
technically feasible robust proxies that we could use instead? ←◁arrowhookright
141.How can we robustly evaluate what values are encoded within a model? ←◁arrowhookright
142.How can we determine whether a model understands the encoded values or is only
mimicking them? Relatedly, to what extent can we claim that an LLM has values,
given an LLM is perhaps more like a superposition of various personas with varying
characteristics?←◁arrowhookright
143.How are values transmitted from one stage of development to another? ←◁arrowhookright
144.What are the limitations of framing the design of AI technologies that broadly benefit
humanity in terms of ‘value alignment’ with humanity? Can we develop alternative or
complementary framings that might help address those limitations?
4.2 Dual-Use Capabilities Enable Malicious Use and Misuse of LLMs
Like all technologies, LLMs have the possibility for misuse by malicious actors. Malicious use of dual-
use capabilities of AI is a recurring concern within literature (Brundage et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al.,
2023; Mozes et al., 2023). However, there exists a significant gap from these relatively high-level artic-
ulations of concern to rigorous research on the topic, resulting in a lack of nuanced and context-specific
understanding of the risks associated with dual-use capabilities. This deficiency in understanding and
practicality is deeply concerning as it hampers the development of effective mitigation strategies. While
we primarily focus on intentional misuse, we note that as LLMs become more widespread, easy-to-use,
and general-purpose, the potential for accidental misuse and other ethically grey uses is also amplified.
This section reviews several plausible malicious use cases of present or future LLMs and
calls for further research to improve our understanding of how LLMs might be misused.
The improved understanding could inform prioritization of concerns and the development of effective
mitigation strategies. Although we focus on LLMs, this is simply due to the focus of our agenda; a
consideration of which types of AI systems have the greatest potential for harmful misuse is out of our
scope.
4.2.1 Misinformation and Manipulation
Recent studies have demonstrated that LLMs can be exploited to craft deceptive narratives with levels
of persuasiveness similar to human-generated content (Pan et al., 2023b; Spitale et al., 2023), to fabri-
cate fake news (Zellers et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2023f), and to devise automated influence operations
84

=== PAGE 85 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
aimed at manipulating the perspectives of targeted audiences (Goldstein et al., 2023). LLMs have
also been found to be used in malicious social botnets (Yang and Menczer, 2023), powering automated
accounts used to disseminate coordinated messages. More broadly, the use of LLMs for the deliberate
generation of misleading information could significantly lower the barrier for propaganda and manip-
ulation (Aharoni et al., 2024), as LLMs can generate highly credible misinformation with significant
cost-savings compared to human authorship (Musser, 2023), while achieving considerable scale and
speed of content generation (Buchanan et al., 2021; Goldstein et al., 2023).
Furthermore, an area of particular concern regards the degree of personalisation that LLMs can achieve
in the production of misleading content, whether wholly false or true but presented in a misleading way.
It is already well-documented that LLMs tend to be sycophantic, that is, selectively present content
according to perceived user desires (Perez et al., 2022a); it is not hard to imagine this capability
being exploited for malicious purposes. By tailoring content to specific demographics or individual
profiles, these models can facilitate the creation of hyper-targeted misinformation (Bagdasaryan and
Shmatikov, 2022; Ferrara, 2023). This feature of LLMs raises alarming possibilities for manipulating
belief systems and public opinion at scale, potentially exacerbating societal divisions (Kirk et al., 2023c)
and undermining trust in trustworthy information sources (Weidinger et al., 2022).
Additionally, while the risks discussed largely concern society-wide implications of LLM-powered misin-
formation, these models can also exacerbate harm to individuals. For example, LLMs can be leveraged
to create highly realistic multimodal deepfakes, which include audio, video, and photographic content.
These deepfakes, often indistinguishable from authentic content, can be used for a range of individual-
level harms, such as the production of falsified sexual images and the discreditation of individuals
(Chesney and Citron, 2019). Such content can do harm even if it is known to be fake (Burga, 2024).
Further empirical and theoretical research is needed to assess the scale and likelihood of the use and
effectiveness of LLMs for misinformation generation and propagation. There is also a need for research
into developing tools and mechanisms to combat misinformation. One successful way of doing so is
designing robust community-based fact-checking tooling (Pröllochs, 2022). LLMs themselves could
potentially form part of the solution; for example, by identifying whya particular piece of informa-
tion is false, surfacing relevant sources to substantiate their claim and providing desirable alternative
explanations (Hu et al., 2023c; Chen and Shu, 2023).
4.2.2 Cybersecurity
LLMs may exacerbate cybersecurity risks in various ways (Newman, 2024). Firstly, LLMs may signifi-
cantly amplify the effectiveness of deceptive operations aimed at tricking people into disclosing sensitive
information or granting adversary access to critical resources. For example, LLMs might prove highly
effective at crafting personalized phishing emails or messages at scale that may be harder for an aver-
age user to recognize as phishing attempts (Karanjai, 2022; Hazell, 2023). In addition to being directly
harmful to the targeted individual, such ‘social engineering’ attacks are often the base of larger hacking
operations (Plachkinova and Maurer, 2018; Salahdine and Kaabouch, 2019). However, the precise im-
pact of LLMs on the likelihood of successful social engineering attacks is currently not clear. To develop
a better understanding of this risk, researchers could perform user studies involving white-hat hackers
to understand how an actual hacker might benefit from using an LLM in her hacking attempts. This
could inform technical or sociotechnical mitigation strategies, such as training an LLM to recognize
when it is being misused for crafting phishing emails etc. and to decline such requests. However, the
technical problem of jailbreaking would remain an issue here (c.f. Section 3.5).
Secondly, coding capabilities of LLMs could be used for malicious purposes (Checkpoint Research,
2022). This may either be done through using off-the-shelf LLMs or through training or fine-tuning
LLMs specifically for this purpose (Checkpoint Research, 2023; Erzberger, 2023). This may include
using code-inspection capabilities of LLMs to find software vulnerabilities, and code-writing capabil-
85

=== PAGE 86 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
ities of LLMs to create novel malware and exploits. However, cybersecurity teams may also leverage
LLMs in a similar fashion to preemptively identify and remedy software vulnerabilities and strengthen
cybersecurity in other ways (Aghaei et al., 2022; Ferrag et al., 2023). Consequently, the net impact
of LLMs on cybersecurity is currently not clear and deserves further study (Hendrycks et al., 2021a).
In addition to developing a more calibrated understanding of how coding capabilities of LLMs may be
used in malicious ways, researchers may focus on developing LLM-based cybersecurity tools that may
be helpful to cybersecurity professionals.
One other way in which coding capabilities of LLMs could prove harmful is if they lower the barriers
for staging a successful cyberattack (Brundage et al., 2018). Current evidence is mixed in this regard
indicating that while LLMs can be used to create novel attacks, this generally requires some know-how
on the part of the user as well (Checkpoint Research, 2023; Carlini, 2023b). However, it is plausible
that the improvements in coding capabilities of LLMs could eliminate this need for expert knowledge in
the future. This risk ought to be monitored closely. One way to do so could be to develop benchmarks
focused on evaluating autonomous code-writing capabilities of a given LLM (Deng et al., 2023b).
Cybersecurity risks can also increase due to the collective resources available to multi-agent systems
powered by LLMs. Such systems could represent a risk similar in scale to botnets, with a large number
of coordinated agents working together (Sun et al., 2023). However, the generative capabilities and
possible emergent abilities of these systems at scale extend the potential impact beyond traditional
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. For instance, multi-agent systems could be used for
targeted vulnerability analysis and exploitation over a range of systems in a coordinated, fault tolerant
manner (Hendrycks et al., 2021a). This could facilitate vulnerability chaining across systems and
networks, enabling multi-stage attacks that are inherently more difficult to mitigate (Roytman and
Bellis, 2023). In addition, multi-vector attacks could shift the attack-defense balance as standard
filtering/monitoring techniques may prove ineffective against generative agents actively concealing their
distributedactivitiesusingadvancedformsofsteganography(deWittetal.,2022)oradversarialattacks
of bounded information-theoretic detectability (Franzmeyer et al., 2023). Similar approaches could also
accelerate the forensics and post-exploitation process to superhuman speeds and efficiency (Xu et al.,
2024b). On the defense side, LLMs could help, for example, through automated analysis of security
logs (Boffa et al., 2022). How the offense-defense balance will shift is an open problem, and much work
remains to be done to safeguard cybersecurity infrastructure from scaled-up threats (Hendrycks et al.,
2023) and within the broader context of multi-agent security (de Witt et al., 2023).
Lastly, there is increasing evidence that LLMs can be used to craft jailbreaks which can be used on other
LLMs and other instances of the same LLM (Chao et al., 2023; Mehrabi et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2023).
This poses a risk to the security of LLMs and may result in a dangerous dynamic where improvement in
a (closed-source) LLM’s capabilities means it can generate more sophisticated jailbreaks (which could
beusedtojailbreakanotherinstanceofthesameLLM).Thereisaneedtounderstandhowthisdynamic
may play out, and what technical and sociotechnical interventions can be done to mitigate this risk.
4.2.3 Surveillance and Censorship
Content moderation has emerged as one of the key use-cases of LLMs (Weng et al., 2023), indicating the
potential of LLMs for surveillance and censorship as well (Edwards, 2023). Surveillance and censorship
are one of the primary tools employed by governments with dictatorial tendencies to suppress opposing
political and social voices. These censorship measures, however, are often quite crude and can be
escaped with little ingenuity. For example, manual supervision of the content (e.g. newspaper articles)
is error-prone and can be circumvented by simple tactics, such as using clever phrasing that does
not appear critical at the surface or hiding critical content within the margins of the articles which
are likely to be overlooked (Hem, 2014). Similarly, automated tools currently used for censorship
of text-based communication at scale are quite primitive and primarily based on keyword-matching
(Knockel et al., 2020). However, LLMs could enable significantly more sophisticated surveillance and
86

=== PAGE 87 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
censorship operations at scale (Feldstein, 2019). Multimodal-LLMs or LLMs combined with speech-
to-text technologies could be used for surveilling and censoring other forms of communication as well,
e.g. phone calls and video messages (Whittaker, 2019). This may collectively contribute towards the
worsening of personal liberties and the heightening of state oppression across the world. Examples have
been documented already, for instance in calling for violence and silencing of political dissidents (Aziz,
2020), and suppression of Palestinian social media accounts (Zahzah, 2021).
Sociotechnical research could help better understand the various ways in which surveillance and censor-
ship may negatively impact the free thought and integrity of democratic institutions (Richards, 2012).
It is also important for the research and academic community to be proactive in this regard and ensure
that their designed models are not misused for surveillance and censorship purposes (Kalluri et al.,
2023). The developers of LLM-based technologies, and civil society at large, ought to resist attempts
at creating laws that provide legal covers to such surveillance efforts, with security concerns used as
the ostensible reason (Ellis-Petersen, 2021). A possible technological mitigation against censorship and
technological lock-in could be the use of perfectly secure steganography (Schroeder de Witt et al., 2023,
iMEC), which allows covert communications and information hiding in the outputs of LLMs under
information-theoretic undetectability.
4.2.4 Warfare and Physical Harm
The use of AI in warfare is highly alarming and may pose dangers to human safety (Hendrycks et al.,
2023). Autonomous drone warfare is being aggressively pursued as a tactic in the current war in Ukraine
(Meaker, 2023), and may already have been used on human targets (Hambling, 2023). The use of AI-
based facial recognition has been documented in the targeting of Palestinians in Gaza (International,
2023). LLMs have already been productized in limited ways for the purposes of warfare planning
(Tarantola, 2023). Furthermore, active research is being carried out to develop multimodal-LLMs that
can act as ‘brains’ for general-purpose robots (Ahn et al., 2022; 2024). Due to the ‘general-purpose’
nature of such advances, it will likely be cost-effective and practical to adapt them for creating more
advanced autonomous weapons. Development of autonomous weapons has been extensively criticized
and cautioned against in prior literature (Sauer and Schörnig, 2012; Sharkey, 2016; Scharre, 2016;
Roff and Moyes, 2016), and identified as a source of catastrophic risk (Hendrycks et al., 2023). These
harms have also been cautioned against by technical machine learning researchers in various open let-
ters (Future of Life Institute, 2016; Foerster, 2020). There exist voluntary pledges by AI companies to
not weaponize their technologies (Boston Dynamics, 2022), however, past evidence indicates that such
voluntary pledges can be side-stepped when convenient as they do not pose any legally binding require-
ments (Christie, 2018; Biddle, 2024). Hence, LLM-based autonomous weapons may soon pose major
safety risks, absent international agreements and national legislation prohibiting their development and
use. Besides political challenges, there are technical challenges around monitoring and enforcement.
Developing or increasing the availability of autonomous drone weapons and facial recognition targeting
may also increase the risk of targeted mass killings by non-state actors.
4.2.5 Hazardous Biological and Chemical Technologies
AI systems such as LLMs, chemical LLMs (Skinnider et al., 2021; Moret et al., 2023), and other LLM-
based biological design tools might soon facilitate the production of bioweapons, chemical weapons,
and other hazardous technologies. In particular, LLMs might enable actors with less expertise to more
easily synthesize dangerous pathogens, while customized chemical and biological design tools might be
more concerning in terms of expanding the capabilities of sophisticated actors (e.g. states) (Sandbrink,
2023). Gopal et al. (2023) and Soice et al. (2023) demonstrated that people with little background could
use LLMs to help make progress towards developing pathogens such as the 1918 pandemic influenza.
However, recent studies suggest that current LLMs are notmore helpful than internet search in this
regard (Mouton et al., 2024; Patwardhan et al., 2024). On the other hand, search engines offer more
practical affordances for removing content vs. e.g. needing to retrain an LLM to ensure the content is
87

=== PAGE 88 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
not influencing future responses. Furthermore, (future) LLM-based technologies could develop strong
reasoning capabilities that might help them make novel discoveries (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024) — this
potential to make novel discoveries could also transfer to hazardous chemical and biological technologies
(Moretetal.,2023), potentially, resultingintechnologydesignsthatmightbemorechallengingtoguard
against via supply-chain monitoring. There is a need for more research to characterize the potential
“uplift” that (current andfuture) LLM-based technologies may provide, as the current studies involved
small sample sizes, only used ‘vanilla’ LLMs and none of them produced conclusive results (Marcus,
2024). The realism of these studies can also be increased by moving them into actual ‘wet’ laboratories
and would benefit from the involvement of experts in clinical trials or psychology research.
Furthermore, there is a need for ongoing monitoring to track how relevant capabilities are evolving with
scale (c.f. Section 2.3). Doing so well may require postulating and refining explicit threat models and
defining clear thresholds for action in advance; such work could also involve national security experts.
Machine learning researchers should also work with professionals who study terrorism and mass killings
to better understand whether and how LLMs might significantly contribute to such risks; this could
involve understanding the social factors underlying such attacks, how the resources currently available
online are – or might be – used by such attackers, and what currently limits the rate and severity of
such attacks. Finally, we note that most of the contemporary work on biological and chemical risks
from LLM-based technologies is concentrated on risks from non-state actors; there is also a need to
better understand how states might misuse LLM-based technologies in this regard (Yassif et al., 2023).
4.2.6 Domain-Specific Misuses
Improvements in LLMs may exert greater pressure to apply LLMs to various domains, such as health
and education (Eloundou et al., 2023). Crude efforts to use LLMs in such domains, however, may
incur harm and should be discouraged strongly. In particular, it is important to guard against different
ways in which LLMs may be misused within any domain. One famous episode of misuse within the
health sector is a mental health non-profit experimenting LLM-based therapy on its users without
their informed consent (Xiang, 2023a). Within the education sector, LLMs may be misused in various
ways that might impact student learning; e.g. as cheating accessory by the students or as (low quality)
evaluator of student’s work by the instructors (Cotton et al., 2023). Recent findings in moral psychology
also suggest that LLMs can generate moral evaluations that people perceive as superior to human
judgments; these could be misused to create compelling yet harmful moral guidance (Aharoni et al.,
2024). Similar risks of misuse may exist in other domains as well.
There is a need for research to better understand how LLMs might be misused across different domains.
Interviews with domain experts and case studies of early deployments across different sectors may help
in this regard. Domain-specific standards and regulations could be established to prevent these risks
frommaterializing(Organization,2021). Oneparticularsociotechnicalchallengeistoeffectivelyidentify
emerging use cases of LLMs, e.g. through surveys and/or in partnership with LLM deployers, who could
monitor use patterns. Several factors make this a non-trivial challenge, even for LLM deployers; for
instance, users may disguise queries or user calls may be spread across various LLM deployers in a way
that might mask the real use (Glukhov et al., 2023).
4.2.7 Mechanisms for Detecting and Attributing LLM Outputs Are Lacking
One overriding challenge in preventing malicious use of LLMs is the difficulty of recognizing outputs
from LLMs and attributing them correctly to particular systems and/or users. Attribution facilitates
accountability and enforcement, which may help disincentivize many forms of malicious use. Techniques
such as watermarking, which embeds detectable patterns in AI-generated content, could be helpful
(Kirchenbauer et al., 2023), but their effectiveness is currently unclear (Zhang et al., 2023e; Huang
et al., 2023e; Hu et al., 2023d) and more work is needed. Increasing access to LLMs (especially open
source models) might make attribution more challenging (Augenstein et al., 2023; Seger et al., 2023).
In particular, even if an open-source model watermarks its outputs, it might be easy to modify it to
88

=== PAGE 89 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
not do so. This motivates the challenge of attributing outputs to particular models in the absence
of (deliberately injected) watermarks. Machine learning researchers could work with cyber security
experts and other professionals to understand the gaps that LLMs will create in current attribution
practice for the particular domains discussed above.
There is a strong risk that dual-use capabilities of LLMs may be exploited for malicious purposes.
LLMs may be misused towards generating targeted misinformation at an unprecedented scale.
The coding capabilities of LLMs may be misused by malicious actors to mount cyberattacks with
greater sophistication and at higher frequencies. LLMs are quite effective as content moderation
tools; this may mean that LLMs get adopted to enact mass surveillance and censorship. LLMs
may be used to power autonomous weapons, creating a possibility of physical harm from them.
Other misuses of LLMs may occur as LLMs are applied to various domains. Active research is
needed to better understand these risks and to create effective mitigation strategies.
145.Can we develop a calibrated understanding of how current and future LLMs could be
used to scale up and amplify misinformation campaigns? What level of human expertise
is required to effectively use LLMs to generate targeted misinformation? ←◁arrowhookright
146.Can we develop reliable techniques to attribute LLM-generated content, helping track
its spread? Can watermarking be an effective measure given the growing availability of
openly accessible LLMs? ←◁arrowhookright
147.How can individuals be protected against harms caused by AI-assisted deepfakes? ←◁arrowhookright
148.What measures can be taken to prevent LLMs from producing sophisticated misinfor-
mation, while simultaneously enhancing their capacity to identify and mitigate misinfor-
mation?←◁arrowhookright
149.Can we develop effective tooling and mechanisms to combat misinformation on online
platforms? How can LLMs themselves be applied to detect and intervene against LLM-
generated misinformation? ←◁arrowhookright
150.How may LLMs contribute to scaling and personalization of social engineering-based
cyberattacks?←◁arrowhookright
151.TowhatextentdoLLMsreducethethresholdoftechnicalexpertiserequiredforexecuting
a successful cyberattack? ←◁arrowhookright
152.DoadvancesincapabilitiesofLLMscauseLLMstobecomebetteratcraftingjailbreaking
attacks? If so, how can the safety of LLMs from jailbreaking attacks (designed by other
LLMs) be assured? ←◁arrowhookright
153.How effective are LLMs at surveillance and censorship? How may LLMs, on their own
or in combination with other technologies (e.g. speech-to-text softwares), contribute to
the expansion and sophistication of current surveillance operations? How can we limit
the use of LLMs for surveillance? ←◁arrowhookright
154.How can the military applications of LLMs, especially LLM-powered autonomous
weapons, be regulated? There appears to be a mass consensus within the machine
learning community that LLMs, and other AIs, should not be weaponized; how can
this consensus be leveraged to create legislation pressure to outlaw autonomous weapons
development across the world? ←◁arrowhookright
155.How might current, or future, LLM-based technologies (including chemical LLMs and
specialized biological design tools based on LLMs) be misused in the design of hazardous
biological and chemical technologies? ←◁arrowhookright
156.Can we identify how LLMs may get misused across various domains, such as health and
education? What regulations are required to prevent such misuses? In general, how can
we best understand LLM use cases and identify those with significant misuse potential?
←◁arrowhookright
89

=== PAGE 90 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
157.Can we design robust watermarking mechanisms that may help us identify LLM-
generated content? ←◁arrowhookright
158.What mechanisms can be used to determine attribution for content generated using
openly available models for which watermarking may not be an appropriate solution (as
it could be easily undone)? ←◁arrowhookright
4.3 LLM-Systems Can Be Untrustworthy
A key desideratum for an LLM from a user’s perspective is ‘trustworthiness’, i.e. assurance of reliability
and consistent performance, and absence of any accidental harm caused by the technology to the user.16
Providing assurance that an LLM-based system will not cause accidental harm remains
a major open challenge. Harms may either occur directly due to the flawed nature of LLMs, e.g.
an LLM generating toxic language or behaving inappropriately in some other ways, or may occur due
to improper usage by a user, e.g. automation bias due to a user’s overreliance on LLM. We overview
several challenges in this section that can potentially undermine a user’s trust in LLMs. The technical
flaws underlying these challenges in many cases appear difficult to address; at least in the immediate
term. Hence, technical research alone may be insufficient to address these challenges, and sociotechnical
interventions may be required to assure that LLM assistants do not incur accidental harm to the users.
4.3.1 Harms of Representation and Other Biases
A pretrained LLM generally has many of the stereotypical biases commonly present in the human
society (Touvron et al., 2023). This makes it difficult for users to trust that LLMs will work well for
them and not produce unfair or biased responses. Appropriate finetuning can effectively limit the bias
displayed in LLM outputs in a variety of situations, e.g. when models are explicitly prompted with
stereotypes (Wang et al., 2023k), but it does not ‘solve’ the problem. Even after finetuning, biases
often resurface when deliberately elicited (Wang et al., 2023k), or under novel scenarios, e.g. in writing
reference letters (Wan et al., 2023a), generating synthetic training data (Yu et al., 2023c), screening
resumes (Yin et al., 2024) or when used as LLM-agents (Pan et al., 2024). The biases outputs are often
much more prominent in low-resource languages (Yong et al., 2023) and in dialects used by marginalized
groups (Hofmann et al., 2024). There is a need for research to develop better and more comprehensive
tools for the detection of bias, toxicity (Wen et al., 2023; Wang and Chang, 2022), and other kinds of
inappropriate behaviors. The current tools primarily focus on detecting content that is explicitly toxic
and offensive, however, the issue of bias goes beyond commonly studied subjects of biases, such as race
and gender (Hofmann et al., 2024). For instance, depending on the finetuning data, LLMs may also
develop a bias towards particular political ideologies (Rutinowski et al., 2023). These biases are still
relatively poorly understood, and there is a need for more extensive evaluations of current LLMs in
novel scenarios to better understand the propensity of LLMs to enact such biases. There is also a need
for a thorough evaluation of how the global south is represented within these models, and what sort
of harmful representations of the global south are reinforced by LLMs (Qadri et al., 2023; Jha et al.,
2024).
4.3.2 Inconsistent Performance across and within Domains
Estimating true capabilities of an LLM is a difficult task (c.f. Section 3.3), especially for naive users
unfamiliar with the brittle nature of machine learning technologies. Exaggeration of model capabilities
by the developers (Lambert, 2023; Blair-Stanek et al., 2023), and issues such as task-contamination
(Roberts et al., 2023b), underrepresentation of tasks or domains (Wu et al., 2023a; McCoy et al., 2023),
and prompt-sensitivity (Anthropic, 2023d) may cause a user to misestimate the true capabilities of a
model. This lack of reliability can undermine user trust or cause harm if a user bases their decision on
16Note that within the machine learning literature, the term ‘trustworthiness’ carries various other meanings as well. The
scope of our discussion is limited to our definition given here
90

=== PAGE 91 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
incorrect or misleading information provided by an LLM. A famous example of this is the US lawyer
who cited a fake case, hallucinated by ChatGPT, in a legal brief filed in a US court (Merken, 2023).
Technical solutions could involve improving the reliability of the LLMs performance (e.g. using retrieval
augmented generation to minimize hallucinations) or providing reliable uncertainty estimates alongside
LLM responses (Fadeeva et al., 2023; Kuhn et al., 2023). However, technical solutions may not be
developed quickly, if at all. Hence, there is a need to understand how the reliability of LLMs can be
improved through extrinsic measures. Towards this goal, it will be useful to understand how reliable a
median user perceives an LLM to be, to what extent they are able to reliably forecast on what problems
a particular LLM will fail (Carlini, 2023a) and how this ability to determine the reliability of an LLM’s
performance evolves as the user interacts further with the LLM. This may be done through user studies
and interviews with various different types of users. It may be difficult to draw very general conclusions,
andmoreproductiveinmanyinstancestofocusontrustworthinessforparticular(e.g.somewhatnarrow)
use cases or domains. Such research could then provide insights into the efficacy of different extrinsic
measures that could be taken to help users use the LLMs safely e.g. providing appropriate education
and disclaimers to the user before they begin interacting with an LLM.
4.3.3 Overreliance
IfauserbeginstoexcessivelytrustanLLM,thismaycausethemtodevelopanoverrelianceontheLLM.
Overreliance can result in automation bias (Kupfer et al., 2023), and can cause errors of omission (user
choosing not to verify the validity of a response) and errors of commission (user believing and acting on
the basis of the LLM’s response, even if it contradicts their own knowledge) (Skitka et al., 1999). It can
be particularly dangerous in domains where the user may lack relevant expertise to robustly scrutinize
the LLM responses. This is particularly a source of risk for LLMs because LLMs can often generate
plausible, yet incorrect or unfaithful, rationalizations of their actions (c.f. Section 3.4.10), which can
mistakenly cause the user to develop the belief that LLM has the relevant expertise and has provided a
valid response. A common tactic used to prevent harms that might arise from overreliance is to include
disclaimers alongside model output that could act as triggers for the user to externally validate the
model response. However, users can get desensitized to such disclaimers over time (OpenAI, 2023b).
Better interface design (e.g. using distinct colors for distinct grades of disclaimers) could help avoid, or
limit, such desensitization. User studies could be done with different user types to better understand
the details of how overreliance might manifest, and what mitigation strategies may be most effective
against it. The use of LLMs as coding assistants by developers could be used to study over-reliance as
coding tasks are often well-posed and can have varying levels of complexity as required.
There is also a need to better understand the related risks that might arise due to consistent and
prolonged usage of LLM by a user in a particular domain. Outsourcing certain types of cognitive tasks
to LLMs, e.g. writing tasks, could impair corresponding skills among LLM users. This is particularly
a risk for the use of LLMs in education where excessive usage of LLM may cause students to develop
an unnecessary, and unwanted, dependency on LLMs. Additionally, prior work has shown that humans
can inherit biases from AI systems, and that these negative effects of AI technology do not naturally
go away even when the biased AI systems are removed (Vicente and Matute, 2023; Kidd and Birhane,
2023). Further research is required to better understand these risks; how they might materialize, and
what can be done to mitigate them?
4.3.4 Contextual Privacy Preservation
As LLMs proliferate through society, this will inevitably result in LLMs simultaneously interacting
with multiple parties (see Section 2.6). In such scenarios, assurance of privacy goes significantly beyond
assuring that the outputs of the LLMs do not contain personally identifiable information (Nissenbaum,
2020), andrequiresthatLLMsdonotleakdataorinformationsharedbyoneactortoanotherneedlessly.
The notion of privacy is not well-formalized in such contexts currently and there is a need for work on
defining and operationalizing it in an appropriate way. In the absence of a formal definition, a useful
91

=== PAGE 92 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
goal could be to assure that in any context LLMs do not share information given by one party with
some other party, unless a human would do so as well. Current LLMs do not provide this assurance
and often leak private information provided by one party to another when a human would not do so
— and common tricks, e.g. prompt-engineering or output filtering do not improve alignment between
the behavior of LLMs and human (Mireshghallah et al., 2023). This hints at some of the fundamental
limitations in preserving privacy in multi-agent contexts.
Trustworthiness, defined as the assurance that users will not experience accidental harm when
using an LLM, is critical for LLM alignment and safety. Among other things, trustworthiness
requires ensuring that users can use LLMs safely despite the occasional unreliability of their
outputs; preventing users from developing an overreliance on LLMs; mitigating harm resulting
from biased representations of societal groups learned by LLMs; ensuring appropriate behavior
acrossallcontexts; preventingthegenerationoftoxicandoffensivecontentbyLLMs; andreliably
preserving user privacy across various contexts.
159.What sort of societal biases are present within LLMs? Can evaluations on complex,
real-world tasks uncover those biases? ←◁arrowhookright
160.To what extent is the global south represented within LLMs? What harmful represen-
tations of the global south are present within the LLMs? ←◁arrowhookright
161.Can we develop better and more comprehensive tools for implicit and explicit toxicity
and offensive language detection? ←◁arrowhookright
162.To what extent are LLM users able to accurately perceive the reliability of LLM outputs?
Doesauser’sabilitytoassessthereliabilityofanLLM’sresponseimprovewithcontinued
interaction?←◁arrowhookright
163.What extrinsic measures can be implemented to ensure that LLM users utilize the tech-
nology safely, especially considering the potential unreliability of LLM responses? ←◁arrowhookright
164.How can we mitigate the potential harms arising from overreliance on LLMs? How can
we prevent users from becoming desensitized to disclaimers about LLMs’ limitations?
←◁arrowhookright
165.How can we make LLMs understand the sensitivity of information in a given context,
and preserve contextual privacy? ←◁arrowhookright
4.4 Socioeconomic Impacts of LLM May Be Highly Disruptive
The rapid evolution of LLMs brings significant socioeconomic opportunities and challenges, impacting
theworkforce,incomeinequality,education,andglobaleconomicdevelopment. Manyofthesechallenges
are systemic in nature, constituting what economists refer to as general equilibrium effects. These
challenges do not arise directly from LLMs causing harm to users but rather from their indirect effects
on the socioeconomic equilibrium. For instance, automation may reduce labor demand, leading to wage
declines and subsequent harm to workers. Consequently, addressing these challenges may necessitate
system-wide policy interventions. To effectively implement such interventions, a thorough
understanding of these challenges and potential mitigation strategies is imperative . In
this section, we explore some of these challenges and pose pertinent research questions that warrant
investigation.
4.4.1 Effects on the Workforce
The effects of integration of LLMs into various industries and workflows on the workforce are likely to
be significant, and pose a great socioeconomic challenge. Since the Industrial Revolution, technological
progress has regularly displaced some workers but led to the creation of new jobs as the growing wealth
generated by better technology led to growing demand for additional goods and services, enabling the
displaced workers to take up new opportunities (Autor, 2015). As a result, the economy adjusted to
92

=== PAGE 93 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
the displacement. By and large, workers in advanced countries today are much better off than they
were at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution (Maddison, 2004). However, there are reasons to be
concerned that the ongoing rapid advances in LLM capabilities in particular, and AI in general, might
disrupt this pattern.
RapidadvancesinLLMsposethreedistinctsetsofchallengesforworkers’incomes(KorinekandStiglitz,
2019; Susskind, 2023). First, they are likely to accelerate the rate of job turnover and disruption —–
affecting more workers, including more highly skilled workers, and making the adjustment process for
society more difficult than what we were used to from prior technological advances. Research could
help identify what sectors are most vulnerable to job disruption (Eloundou et al., 2023) and how the
displaced workers within those sectors can be helped to become productive workers in other growing
sectors. Second, although technological progress means that society may produce more wealth overall,
there is a risk that the general-purpose nature of LLMs may lead to progress that is biased against
labor, meaning that the share of that wealth that goes to labor may decline. The overall effect on wages
is then a horse race between these two opposing forces. The fate of blue-collar workers in recent history
may be a harbinger of what lies ahead for white-collar workers: as a result of skill-biased technological
change, the wage of the median male blue-collar worker has declined over the past four decades, when
adjusted for inflation, even though the overall economy in the US has tripled (Autor, 2019). Early
results suggest a negative impact of LLMs on certain categories of jobs (Hui et al., 2023). Third, if
future LLMs and robots advance to the point where they can perform virtually all the work tasks, they
would disrupt labor markets more fundamentally: if machines can do workers’ jobs, wages would fall
to machines’ user cost (Korinek and Juelfs, 2023). This would pose fundamental challenges for labor
markets and income distribution (Korinek, 2023).
Aside from their effects on incomes, the rapid advances in LLMs also risk reducing job quality. Au-
tomation often tends to increase not only the physical but also the emotional demands put on workers,
exposing them to greater surveillance, higher job intensity, and less human agency (Bell, 2022). These
trends have already been observed in the increase of digital labour (Casilli and Posada, 2019) and the
platformization of labour more generally (Nyabola, 2023); as LLMs become more widely applied they
could exacerbate these trends.
More fundamentally, work is not only the main source of income for the majority of people, but also
the main activity that occupies our time. As a result, many derive a significant part of our identity, life
satisfaction, and meaning from work (Susskind, 2023). If people lose their work, they would thus lose
much more than their income, with broad implications for our society and our political system (Bell
and Korinek, 2023).
Two observations might help tackle the resulting challenges (Korinek and Juelfs, 2023). First, if the
non-monetary aspects of work are so important, people could presumably continue to work even when
machines can automate it — they just may not earn much of an income from it. In surveys, a majority
of workers are not very satisfied with their work (Gallup, 2022) and would likely be happier if they
receivedthesameincomewithouttheneedtodoajob. Second, thingsbecometrickierifoneindividual’s
decision on whether to work affects others’ well-being, for example, because it affects others’ scope to
form social connections at work or because it has implications for political stability. Economists call
such effects externalities. When significant externalities are at work, there is often a role for public
policy to improve upon the socio-economic equilibrium. Research could work to identify what the best
interventions could be that might be implemented via appropriate public policy. One such intervention
could be to mandate LLM-developers to conduct impact assessments or risk assessments for whether
their AI systems augment workers and improve working conditions. However, the general-purpose
nature of the LLMs may make conducting such risk assessments challenging.
93

=== PAGE 94 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
4.4.2 Effects on Inequality
LLMs could potentially worsen socioeconomic inequalities (Capraro et al., 2023). Effects on inequal-
ity are closely linked to the effects of LLMs on workers but ultimately depend on how the fruits of
technological progress are distributed. There are three important challenges associated with this:
First, if the role and compensation of capital rise and the role and compensation of labor decline in
an LLM-powered economy, inequality may go up because work is the main source of income for the
majority of people. There are signs that this may already have happened because of earlier automation
technologiesinrecentdecades(KarabarbounisandNeiman,2014). Thishasledtocallstosteeradvances
in AI in a direction that complements workers rather than substituting them (Korinek and Stiglitz,
2020; Klinova and Korinek, 2021). This also applies to LLMs. A tangible example of an LLM that
complements workers would be a system that advises call service center agents how to best handle calls
(Brynjolfsson et al., 2023). An example that substitutes for workers would be a system that replaces
workers altogether. Given the general-purpose nature of LLMs, there is a risk that advances in any
given use case may initially complement workers but eventually progress to a stage where they can
displace them. However, human decisions can influence the extent to which LLMs complement vs.
substitute workers. This includes developers of such systems, business leaders who deploy them, and
lawmakers and regulators who shape the economic and societal context in which these systems operate.
Economic and sociological research could help understand how LLM-based technologies are likely to get
adopted, for instance, by interviewing workers who are early adopters or studying historical examples of
integrating new technologies into workspaces or industries. There is also a need for concerted efforts to
best educate the business leaders on leveraging the growth benefits of LLMs in a way that is minimally
disruptive to the larger society.
Second, the large fixed cost of training cutting-edge LLMs and the network effects involved imply that
the market for the most advanced LLMs tends towards a natural monopoly structure in which only
one or a small number of players will be successful, a phenomenon that has been termed ‘algorithmic
monoculture’ in the literature (Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021; Bommasani et al., 2022). As a result,
LLM developers may amass significant market power. This might result in reduced social welfare,
and lead to LLM-providers extracting monopoly rents from their customers (Kleinberg and Raghavan,
2021; Jagadeesan et al., 2023). These concerns may become even more important if the producers of
LLMs engage in vertical integration and also participate in the market for downstream applications,
for example, if an LLM company also enters the market for legal advice, medical services, etc. In the
limit, the market for leading LLM providers could be the entire economy as the capabilities of LLMs
improve across the board (Korinek and Vipra, 2024). This centralization of power could be even more
problematic due to the potentially negative impact on the governance of LLMs (c.f. Section 4.5.4).
The tendency towards centralization could be mitigated by a robust antitrust response and other
policy interventions. However, this requires ensuring that economic policymakers are cognizant of the
technological scenarios that lie ahead and their economic implications. The onus is on the technical
community, which is generally more prescient about the impending technological developments, to
effectively communicate and engage with economic policymakers in this regard. They may do so by
writing educational documents aimed at a non-technical audience (e.g. Bowman, 2023), or releasing
policy briefs on their research (e.g. Barrett et al., 2023). An alternative solution could be to prevent
materialization of an algorithmic monoculture by increasing access to LLMs and broadening the pool
of LLM developers, e.g. via open-source and open-science (Solaiman, 2023). Researchers could help
improve the understanding of the extent to which current dynamics, in which leading LLM developers
remain closed-source, but a number of less capable open-source competitors exist, are likely to lead to
monopoly and identify interventions that could help mitigate them.
Third, as LLMs are becoming more powerful, who has access and who hasn’t is becoming a more
and more important question. For example, automated coding tools have been shown to produce
94

=== PAGE 95 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
significant productivity gains, e.g. >50%in some cases (Peng et al., 2023). Individuals who don’t
have access —– whether it is for financial reasons, for reasons of education, because of corporate or
governmental policies, or for geopolitical reasons — might be at a growing disadvantage. In recent
decades social scientists have observed a growing digital divide based on unequal access to digital
technologies (Van Dijk, 2020). LLMs risk giving rise to a new ‘intelligence divide’ based on who has
access to the most intelligent LLMs and who hasn’t.
4.4.3 Economic Challenges for Education
In a knowledge-based economy, education equips individuals with the human capital that prepares
them to be productive workers. Human capital is often considered as our greatest asset. Yet the rapid
emergence of LLMs poses three significant economic challenges for education:
First, given the rapid emergence of LLMs as a powerful productivity tool, virtually the entire white-
collar workforce may need to learn to use LLMs. Cognitive workers may need to learn how to prompt
and steer LLMs, how to properly evaluate the output generated by LLMs, and how to incorporate them
into their workflows in order to optimally benefit. This is one of the factors slowing down the rollout
of LLMs in organizations throughout our economy (McAfee et al., 2023).
Second, while educators are challenged to teach new tools, LLMs also force them to fundamentally
rethink the way in which they provide education and evaluate students (Mollick and Mollick, 2023;
Cotton et al., 2023). LLMs could help unlock teaching methodologies that were not previously viable
and improve the overall education quality (Khan, 2023). However, issues such as low technological
readiness may hinder the rapid adoption of LLMs in educational contexts (Yan et al., 2023). There is
a need for further research to better understand these issues and how to mitigate them.
Third, for education, a dark side of the positive productivity effects of LLMs is that they devalue a
significant part of the human capital that workers have accumulated in the past. A growing number of
studies show that lesser-skilled workers benefit more from LLMs than more highly-skilled workers (Noy
and Zhang, 2023; Dell’Acqua et al., 2023). Another way of putting these results is that the human
capital of highly skilled workers is no longer as valuable as it used to be, which may eventually lead to
reduced hiring and training, and lower wages for skilled workers. This could have negative second-order
effects. Currently, skilled labour presents a technical and moral bottleneck to the deployment of AI for
malicious purposes (e.g. tech workers protesting Project Maven Shane and Wakabayashi, 2018), but as
their jobs become (fully or partially) automated or, these workers may have less ability and agency to
contest the uses of LLMs, increasing the hegemony of a narrowing set of powerful actors.
4.4.4 Global Economic Development
Many of the themes and challenges that we discussed above come together when analyzing the socio-
economic effects on developing countries. The workforce of developing countries may suffer from a
retrenchment of outsourcing as many simple cognitive tasks that used to be performed in developing
countries — for example, in call centers –— can be automated with LLMs. This may adversely affect
the economies of the poor countries (Georgieva, 2024). The inequality implications of LLMs also have
an international dimension as there may be a growing ‘intelligence divide’ between advanced countries
that have access to leading LLMs and poorer countries that do not. Differential productivity effects
may give rise to terms-of-trade losses for developing countries (Korinek et al., 2022). Similarly, many of
the profits generated by leading LLMs will accrue to advanced countries. On the other hand, developing
countries may share in the productivity benefit of LLMs with advanced countries if LLMs are accessible
to populations in Global South, both in terms of technology design and in terms of pricing. Surface-
level usage statistics seem to indicate that freely available LLMs have indeed seen considerable adoption
among Global South populations (e.g. India and Brazil are the second and third largest sources of web
traffic to ChatGPT; Similarweb, 2024). However, there may exist extrinsic factors that might limit
wider penetration of LLMs among Global South populations, such as lack of internet connectivity and
95

=== PAGE 96 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
poor tech literacy among the populations. LLMs could potentially be leveraged to address some of the
economic challenges faced by countries in the Global South. For example, teacher shortage is a critical
issue that negatively impacts quality of education among Global South countries (Unesco, 2022). It is
plausible that LLMs could be used to help mitigate this issue.
Additionally, in contrast to most other technologies, global adoption of LLMs requires that they are
proficient in all world languages. However, even multilingual models perform worse in lower-resource
languages (Etxaniz et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024) and “think” in English even when fine-tuned for
other languages (Wendler et al., 2024). This has severe safety and security implications as models that
might be aligned in English might not be equally well-aligned in other languages (Deng et al., 2023a;
Yong et al., 2023) or may perform worse in other languages (Aroyo et al., 2024; Holtermann et al.,
2024). Additionally, LLMs may cost an order of magnitude more to use in some languages (up to 15
times in ChatGPT’s case; Ahia et al., 2023; Petrov et al., 2023b). Hence, ensuring that LLMs work
well regardless of the language in which they are used is key if we want to ensure they are a tool for
reducing global inequalities rather than further exacerbating them.
The socioeconomic impacts of LLMs have the potential to be highly disruptive if not effectively
managed. LLMs are likely to adversely affect the workforce, exacerbate societal inequality, and
introduce new challenges for the education sector. Furthermore, the implications of LLM-based
automation on global economic development remain uncertain. These challenges are complex
and systemic in nature; there do not exist any simple fixes. To devise solutions, we need to
develop a deep and nuanced understanding of these issues. Answering the following questions
may help make progress towards this goal.
166.How can we better understand and forecast the disruptive effects of LLMs on job avail-
ability and job quality in different sectors? How can displaced workers be helped to
transition to other sectors? ←◁arrowhookright
167.How can LLM developers best conduct impact assessments or risk assessments for
whether AI systems improve working conditions (by augmenting workers) or not? ←◁arrowhookright
168.How can LLM-based systems be designed to augment workers and improve working
conditions, as opposed to automating and discplacing workers? ←◁arrowhookright
169.How can we best educate business leaders to leverage the growth benefits of LLMs in a
way that is minimally disruptive to society? ←◁arrowhookright
170.How likely is the market for advanced LLMs to become a monopoly or oligopoly? What
will the ramifications of such market concentration be on wealth distribution across
society?←◁arrowhookright
171.How can we ensure equitable access to LLMs for individuals of all socioeconomic back-
grounds?←◁arrowhookright
172.To what extent are LLMs likely to exacerbate an ‘intelligence divide’ based on access to
the most advanced LLMs? ←◁arrowhookright
173.How can LLM developers best keep economic policymakers updated on the technological
scenarios that lie ahead and their economic implications (e.g. by writing policy briefs or
writing informal educational documents)? ←◁arrowhookright
174.How do we best educate the workforce for the effective use of LLMs and retrain disrupted
workers?←◁arrowhookright
175.What factors might impede adoption of LLM-based technology in educational contexts?
How can these factors be mitigated? ←◁arrowhookright
176.How can we better understand the second-order effects of LLM-driven automation on AI
safety and alignment? E.g. could LLM-driven automation reduce the agency and ability
of skilled labor to resist immoral usage of technologies? ←◁arrowhookright
96

=== PAGE 97 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
177.How might LLM-based automation negatively impact the economies of Global South
countries?←◁arrowhookright
178.How accessible are LLMs to Global South populations? How can this accessibility be
improved? What measures can be taken by governments to address issues related to lack
of internet connectivity, poor tech literacy etc.? ←◁arrowhookright
179.How can LLMs be used to help address some of the issues that hinder the economic
development of Global South countries? For example, how can LLMs be used to help
improve the quality of education available to Global South populations? ←◁arrowhookright
180.How to ensure that LLMs support all the world’s languages equally, especially low-
resource languages with large number of speakers? How do we ensure that LLMs are a
tool for a global levelling up rather than further exacerbating economic divides? ←◁arrowhookright
4.5 LLM Governance Is Lacking
Governance will play an essential role in the safety and alignment of LLMs, in particular, and AI in
general (Bullock et al., 2022a). Governance encompasses not only formal regulations, but also a number
of other mechanisms including norms, soft law, codes of ethics, co-regulation, industry standards, and
sector-specific guidelines (Veale et al., 2023); see Table 5. Governance could supplement technical
solutions, e.g. by mandating they be applied as appropriate. It could also substitute for technical
solutions by preventing unsafe development, deployment, or use of LLMs when there do not exist
sufficient technical tools for safety. However, serious efforts to govern LLMs remain fairly
nascent (e.g. US Executive Order (White House, 2023), or EU AI Act (Council of the European
Union, 2024)) and efforts to date have mostly been ill-defined and/or voluntary. A number of
governance challenges remain that ought to be addressed, or mitigated, to ensure LLMs are beneficial
to society and do not contribute to harm to any societal group. Within this section, we divide our
discussion of challenges that hinder LLM governance into two parts. We first discuss meta-challenges
that complicate governance such as lack of requisite scientific understanding of LLMs, lack of effective
fast-moving governance institutions, lack of culpability schemes, and corporate power. We complement
this with a discussion of practical challenges focused on the fact that most governance mechanisms
are underdeveloped and concrete proposals for governance are lacking. We note that our discussion on
governance challenges complements other related works (Dafoe, 2018; Anderljung and Carlier, 2021;
Shavit et al., 2023; Barnard and Robertson, 2024).
Meta-Challenges — Challenges That May Limit Efficacy of LLM Governance
The governance of generative models (both LLMs and generative image models) is challenging due
to factors such as the rapid productization of the technology, economically disruptive nature of the
technology (c.f. Section 4.4), high potential for misuse (c.f. Section 4.2), and the rapidly evolving tech-
nological landscape (Bengio et al., 2023). Indeed, several meta-challenges exist that might limit the
efficacy of LLM governance. These challenges include a lack of scientific understanding and technical
tools necessary for governing LLMs effectively, the need for agile governance institutions capable of
keeping pace with technological advancements (which is an antithesis to the traditional slow bureau-
cratic nature of the governments), a need to better understand the competitive dynamics between AI
companies to ensure that competitive pressure does not result in irresponsible AI development, risks of
regulatory capture due to corporate power, a need for international cooperation and consensus, and a
lack of clarity on accountability for harms caused by LLMs.
4.5.1 Lack of Scientific Understanding and Unreliability of Technical Tools Complicate
Governance
Effective governance of a technology hinges on three key elements: a comprehensive scientific under-
standing of the technology to gauge potential risks, dependable auditing tools to evaluate practical
97

=== PAGE 98 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Table 5: Examples of different governance mechanisms relevant to the governance of LLM, and
AI broadly.
Governance Mechanism Examples
Global Frameworks, Agreements or
ConventionsDraft Council of Europe Framework Convention on AI,
Democracy, and Human Rights (Council of Europe, 2023)
Regional Regulation EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Voigt
and Von dem Bussche, 2017)
EU AI Act (Council of the European Union, 2024)
Domestic Regulation China Administrative Provisions on the Management of
Deep Synthesis of Internet Information Services
(Finlayson-Brown and Ng, 2023)
USA AI Initiative Executive Order (White House, 2023)
Sub-national Regulation California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) (Goldman,
2020)
International/supranational “soft law” OECD Recommendation on AI 2019 (OECD, 2019)
EU Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial
Intelligence, 2019 (AI-HLEG, High-Level Expert Group on
Artificial Intelligence, 2019)
UNESCO 2021 recommendations on the ethical use of AI
(Unesco, 2021)
National “soft law” UK NCSC “Guidelines for secure AI system development”,
2023 (National Cyber Security Center, 2019)
Industry Co-regulation Partnership on AI (PAI, 2017)
Frontier Model Forum (Frontier Model Forum, 2023)
Industry Self-regulation Anthropic’s Responsible Scaling Policy (Anthropic, 2023e)
Google AI Principles (Google AI, 2018)
Standards organizations outputs ISO data governance instruments (ISO, International
Organization for Standardization, 2017)
IEEE’s Ethically Aligned Design (IEEE, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2018)
CEN/CENELEC work on standards to implement EU
AIA (ongoing)
US NIST Artificial Intelligence Risk Management
Framework (AI RMF) (NIST, National Institute of
Standards and Technology, 2023)
Internal institutional policies University research ethics committees
Company AI ethics and safety research teams (e.g.
Microsoft’s FATE team, Deepmind’s Scalable Alignment
team), boards and codes
Private legal instruments Contracts: e.g. Microsoft-OpenAI deal (Bradshaw et al.,
2023)
Licenses: e.g. RAILS license (Responsible AI License)
(RAIL Team, 2024)
98

=== PAGE 99 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
risks, and effective methods to intervene upon and mitigate these risks (Raji, 2021). However, as noted
throughout the agenda, all three are currently underdeveloped for LLMs. Critical aspects of LLMs,
such as in-context learning (Section 2.1) and reasoning abilities (Section 2.4), are poorly understood.
Furthermore, existing auditing tools, including evaluation (Section 3.3) and interpretation methods
(Section 3.4), are not reliable enough to provide meaningful assurance of model safety outside of very
narrow contexts. And the primary technical tool for mitigating risks, safety finetuning, lacks robust
generalization (Section 3.2).
These issues complicate governance and contribute to a lack of scientific consensus on the nature and
severityofrisksassociatedwithLLMs. ThislackoftechnicalclarityisonereasonGuhaetal.(2023)and
Kapoor et al. (2024) caution against rushing to regulate. Yet, the process of establishing regulation
has tended to be slower than the rate of AI progress. Thus, it is crucial to generate and evaluate
governance proposals despiteour presently limited technical understanding. Proposals could explore
howgovernanceapproachescouldbeadaptedbasedontheleveloftechnicalunderstandingofthemodels
and the rate at which the field might be progressing; for instance, how should a governing body change
risk thresholds in response to new evidence? Alternatively, proposals could seek to accelerate technical
understanding of LLMs and their risks and harms, e.g. by funding research and building government
capacity. Moreover, understanding the interconnections among diverse risk types is required to inform
strategies for risk governance (Kasirzadeh, 2024). Another proposal is a temporary pauseor slowdown
on AI and LLM development (Future of Life Institute, 2023), based on the hope that this time could
be used to develop standardized safety protocols and make progress on safety, e.g. through technical
research. However, this proposal has received much criticism. It may adversely affect AI alignment and
safety research and cause ‘overfitting’ of alignment research to whatever the state-of-the-art model at
the time of the pause might be (Belrose, 2023) or might be infeasible to enforce (Luccioni, 2023). On
the whole, it remains unclear whether governing bodies should aim to moderate the pace of progress
in AI, and if so, what governance mechanisms (e.g. compute governance, see Section 4.5.11) could be
used for this purpose.
4.5.2 Need for Effective, Fast-Moving Governance Institutions
Given the rapid pace of advances in LLMs, governance institutions will need to adapt quickly to remain
effective. Governments are currently attempting to regulate AI both through existing institutions, such
as NIST in the USA (White House, 2023), or by novel legislation, such as the EU AI Act in Europe
(Council of the European Union, 2024). However, capacity issues might limit the ability of governments
to design and implement effective policies for governing LLMs quickly (Marchant, 2011). For example,
regulatory bodies might struggle to enforce laws due to the lack of resources and relevant expertise,
as has been the case with the enforcement of data protection laws (Jelinek and Wiewiórowski, 2022).
However, despite these shortcomings in practice, government regulation has unique legitimacy and
authority. Hence, it is worth asking how these shortcomings may be addressed.
One approach to overcome these limitations could involve creating new institutions through legislative
measures. For example, Tutt (2017) proposes an FDA-like body for algorithmic systems. There is
indeed a growing trend towards the enactment of tailored AI laws, particularly led by the EU and
China. These laws may encompass large models as a specific category, such as the provision of the EU
AI Act concerning foundation models or general-purpose AI (GPAI) (Weatherbed, 2023). Investigating
the impact of such laws on the development and application of LLMs is one clear direction for research;
this could involve a comparative study of different national approaches to LLM regulation, and/or an
analysis of the priorities, assumptions, and ideologies driving different AI regulations (Au, 2023).
On the other hand, existing regulation could also be fruitfully applied to the governance of LLMs
(Gaviria, 2022; Bhatnagar and Gajjar, 2024). This includes copyright and data privacy laws, speech
laws, labor laws, advertising standards, tort, product liability, and more. However, it remains unclear
to what extent current regulation is sufficient to mitigate risks. Existing regulators may also not
99

=== PAGE 100 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
have the necessary capacity, expertise, and regulatory authority to effectively regulate LLMs. Engler
(2023) argue for expanding the powers of the existing regulatory bodies — in particular granting
them the power to issue subpoenas for algorithmic investigations and for setting up rules for especially
impactful algorithms. Further research here identifying opportunities and gaps would be valuable. This
could include analyses of the current technical capacities of regulatory bodies as well as their resource
allocation and knowledge acquisition strategies. Furthermore, the merits and demerits of various forms
of public-private partnership proposals for addressing capacity issues of governments could be explored.
This may include analysis of both traditional forms of public-private partnerships such as governments
directlycontractingtheservicesofaprivateactorforvarioustasks, ornovelproposalssuchasregulatory
markets (Hadfield and Clark, 2023). Center for AI Safety et al. (2024) argue that current proposals for
regulatory markets are flawed and do not adequately incentivize private regulators to prioritize safety.
In general, while the private regulatory institutions may be more agile than government institutions
and could help standardize regulation across jurisdictions, they may also increase the risk of regulatory
capture, asprivatepartnersmighthavestrongindustryties(e.g.financialinterestsinLLMdevelopment,
deployment, or use Center for AI Safety et al., 2024); and such a set-up may also bypass government
processes meant to protect against regulatory capture. Generally, there is a need to better understand
the robustness and efficacy of different ways through which governments could outsource auditing and
regulationtoprivateactors(Costanza-Chocketal.,2022). Thereisalsoaneedtoidentifymeasuresthat
could be taken by governments and other public-interest institutions (e.g. universities, NGOs, policy
think tanks) to create an ecosystem that incentivizes top talent to contribute to governance objectives
— e.g. by working for government regulators, private auditors or other public-interest bodies — given
the large compensation packages being offered by leading AI companies (Mann, 2023).
4.5.3 Incentivizing Cooperation and Disincentivizing High-Risk Approaches to AI Development
Responsible and safe AI can be seen as a collective action problem, creating an additional challenge
for governance to confront (Askell et al., 2019). More precisely, while most AI practitioners might
prefer a low-risk approach, competitive pressures (e.g. resulting from Safety-Performance Trade-offs,
c.f. Section 2.7) might cause one or more organizations to take a higher-risk approach (e.g. a ‘move
fast and break things’ approach Blodget, 2009). This could trigger a race to the bottom, progressively
increasing competitive pressure on other organizations to adopt higher-risk approaches (Armstrong
etal.,2016;Hendrycksetal.,2023). Forthesereasons, itiscrucialtodisincentivizehigh-riskapproaches
to AI development, deployment, and use, and to prevent such dangerous dynamics from materializing.
Regulation and treaties could mandate safe development practices. In particular, specialized regulation
could be designed with an explicit focus on the development of frontier AI (Anderljung and Korinek,
2024).Outside-the-box auditing covering organizations’ development and deployment practices could
help verify compliance (and identify risks that may have been overlooked) (Casper et al., 2024a).
Technical researchers could develop better (game-theoretic) models of race dynamics whose analysis
may yield insights about the relative effectiveness of various interventions that could be undertaken to
disincentivize a race. Armstrong et al. (2016) provide a preliminary analysis of this kind, however, their
analysis relies on various simplifying assumptions that may not be reflective of real-world dynamics.
In general, technical researchers could work to identify safe development and deployment practices and
to identify incentives and technical loopholes that might lead developers not to adopt them. They
could also work with legal and business experts to evaluate the effectiveness of potential regulations by
anticipating how developers might respond.
4.5.4 Corporate Power May Impede Effective Governance
The increasing power and influence of large corporations may make effective governance difficult. There
exists a power asymmetry between corporate entities profiting from LLMs and other social groups (e.g.
civil society). State-of-the-art LLMs are developed by or in partnership with, some of the world’s
largest private tech companies. NVIDIA, which supplies most of the computing hardware for LLMs
has recently seen its market capitalization increase to over $2 trillion, roughly a 5x increase in the
100

=== PAGE 101 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
past year. Lobbying efforts around LLMs have also increased dramatically in the recent past (Saran
and Mattoo, 2022; Zakrzewski, 2022; Lindman et al., 2023). This poses a risk of governance protocols
related to LLMs becoming excessively favorable to tech companies, potentially leading to regulatory
capture at the cost of the interests of other societal groups, particularly marginalized communities who
have historically been disproportionatelyaffected by poorlydesignedAI technologies (Reventlow, 2021).
Researchers working on LLM policy should aim to document and account for corporate influence, with
a focus on identifying ways in which corporate interests might diverge from the public interest. At
a more meta-level, it may be helpful to consider how corporate structures could be designed so that
the interests of corporations extend beyond mere maximization of profits, and better align with the
larger interests of the society. Researchers could design novel proposals in this regard, or evaluate the
robustness of the existing proposals (e.g. Anthropic’s Long Term Benefit Trust Anthropic, 2023f). This
is of particular relevance given the recent power struggle between OpenAI board members, founders,
and investors (Roose, 2023; Reich, 2023).
In addition to their ability to influence governance through lobbying efforts, LLM developers may
also directly influence public opinion through the design choices they make. For instance, how an
LLM expresses itself and responds to queries, especially those with a political angle to them, can
have a significant impact (Jakesch et al., 2023; Santurkar et al., 2023). This direct influence that
technological companies can exert on public opinion has been recognized in prior work. Lessig (2006)
discuss the power of technology or “code” itself as a governance mechanism, noting that it generally
lacks democratic oversight and that much software used globally is built by US-based companies, often
without regard to the local laws of its overseas markets (Sánchez-Monedero et al., 2020). To help
improve democratic oversight, machine learning researchers could consider how such influence might be
measured, detected, and counter-acted (O’Callaghan et al., 2015). There is also a need for collaboration
among machine learning researchers, sociotechnical researchers, and civil servants to determine how to
best protect government institutions such as democratic processes from such influence, e.g. to help
establish standards defining the limits of legitimate influence.
While the academic community can help counterbalance corporate influence over governance, the large
majority of AI researchers receive or have received funding from big tech companies (Abdalla and
Abdalla, 2021). This dependency on industrial funding may grow further due to the exorbitant costs
of conducting LLM research. More research is needed to identify the influence of corporate power on
academia, policy, and research. It is also important to consider governance proposals that may help
the academic community preserve its independence, and generally increase the agency of academics
to contribute effectively to safety and alignment research (Raji et al., 2023). The lack of academic
consensus around AI risks and mitigations also hinders the academic community’s ability to play such
a role, rendering us unable to speak with one voice to provide clear guidance to policymakers or other
elements of civil society.
4.5.5 LLMs Require International Governance
International governance will be critical for tackling factors such as competitive dynamics between AI
companies. However, despite the fact that data-driven AI is a global and cross-border phenomenon,
laws and regulators are predominantly national. As a result, issues of jurisdiction, applicable law, and
regulatory arbitrage, which already complicate effective regulation of data privacy laws, will almost
certainly affect AI and LLM regulation. A popular proposal in the literature is the establishment of
international institutions (Ho et al., 2023; Trager et al., 2023; Maas and Villalobos, 2023). For example,
Trager et al. (2023) propose the creation of an inter-state International AI Organisation to certify com-
pliance by states to international oversight standards while supporting member states in meeting these
standards through domestic regulatory capacities. The UK has promoted the development of global
AI safety Institutes alongside a pledge to put safeguards on models posing systemic risks (of Partici-
pating Countries, 2023). As of early 2024, AI safety institutes are being established in the UK, US,
101

=== PAGE 102 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Japan, and Singapore at the national level. These organizations could be a productive site of more
international collaboration on AI governance.
One other possible route to global harmonization of AI regulation is via the global diffusion of domestic
regulation, such as the EU AI Act (Council of the European Union, 2024). The EU aspires to position
itself as a global ‘gold standard’ (building on the example of GDPR), by requiring any company selling
into the EU Single Market to follow its rules. Through the Brussels effect, it may be cheaper for
companies that comply with EU requirements to comply with the same requirements even in other
jurisdictions (Siegmann and Anderljung, 2022). However, conflict historically exists between the EU
model of human rights-centric prescriptive risk-based regulation and the US’s laissez-faire regulation
of Silicon Valley and poor federal privacy protection (Solove and Schwartz, 2022). This may hold back
any international harmonization of AI regulation (Kaminski, 2023; Smuha, 2021). However, there is
some initial evidence that the US government may take a proactive approach to regulating AI (White
House, 2023), suggesting that this conflict may not adversely impact the international governance of
AI.
Another important development here may be the finalization of the Council of Europe Convention on AI
(Council of Europe, 2023) which like the European Convention on Human Rights and the Cybercrime
Convention can be joined by non-European states, and so is potentially a global treaty. Alongside
these developments, China has been promoting cooperation on international AI governance through
initiatives such as the Global AI Governance Initiative (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, People’s Republic
of China, 2023). While this initiative has elements in common with both the EU approach and UK
and US approaches, there exists a risk that multiple separate or overlapping international AI gover-
nance forums will emerge, complicating efforts to achieve global consensus on standards and safety.
International governance may also be impeded by a trust deficit and an arms race between nations —
particularly China and the U.S. (Meacham, 2023). Overcoming parochial concerns and assuring that
governments can credibly cooperate on critical issues — such as limiting the use of AI in weapons
(see Section 4.2.4) is perhaps the grand challenge in international governance of AI. Dialogue between
the scientific communities could help pave the way for such cooperation (FAR AI, 2024; Maas and
Villalobos, 2023). Specifically for the governance of AI in military applications, multi-country military
alliances like NATO could play a critical role in ensuring responsible, and ideally highly restricted, use
of AI in weapons (Stanley-Lockman and Trabucco, 2022).
4.5.6 Culpability Schemes Are Needed for LLM-Based Systems — Especially LLM-Agents
Providing assurances about a system’s safety and intended behavior inherently requires establishing
clear accountability — explicitly assigning responsibility and culpability in cases where the system acts
in undesirable or unintended ways. It is currently unclear who ought to be held responsible when a LLM
system causes harm to its user or other humans. Users may deliberately misuse LLMs (see Section 4.2),
but preventing such misuse may be intractable without interventions at the development or deployment
stage (Anderljung and Hazell, 2023). Blumenthal and Hawley (2023) propose that companies be held
liable for harms caused by “their models”, however, Kapoor et al. (2024) observe that developers who
open source their model would struggle to prevent misuse and attendant liability. Developers are often
extremely well-resourced and can retain privileged access to their systems. Hence, they are technically
best equipped to detect and mitigate safety issues, but it is unclear to what extent they are incentivized
to disclose those issues, especially if disclosing them could harm their business interests. Importantly,
it is not necessary to hold only a single actor (user, deployer or developer) responsible: different actors
could be held responsible to varying degrees (Wex, 2023).
Gaps in how to assign responsibility will likely become more acute as systems become increasingly
agentic and autonomous (Buiten et al., 2023) (see Section 2.5), which can amplify the harm that they
cancause(Chanetal.,2023a). Thus, thereisaneedforanticipatorygovernancetopreemptivelyaddress
the risks posed by LLMs, for example, by establishing regulatory criteria to mediate the deployment
102

=== PAGE 103 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
of LLM-agents. This will be helped by developing frameworks to monitor and evaluate deployed LLM-
agents and designing mechanisms for ascertaining accountability in case of failures (Kampik et al., 2022;
Chan et al., 2024). These questions are considered in greater detail in the recently released agenda on
agent governance by Shavit et al. (2023).
Once deployed, LLM-agents will interact among themselves and with humans — creating an additional
sourceofrisks(seeSection2.6). Normativeinfrastructure(e.g. bureacraciesBullocketal.,2022b)which
governs interactions between humans — e.g. accounting of responsibility and blame — can break down
with the introduction of algorithmic or machine-based decision-making. For example, high-frequency
algorithmic traders are believed to have contributed to a number of flash crashes in stock markets (Tee
and Ting, 2019), e.g. the flash crash of 2010 (CFTC and SEC, 2010) and the 2014 US Treasury market
flash crash (Levine et al., 2017). Similar to algorithmic traders, LLM-agents will likely possess novel
capabilities and affordances, such as higher processing and action speed, the capability to ingest large
amounts of text rapidly, etc. that might disrupt normative infrastructures in undesirable ways. Further
work is required to understand better the governance challenges posed by LLM-agents (Kolt, 2024),
especially in multi-agent scenarios where they may interact and influence each other (Hammond et al.,
2024). A better understanding of these challenges may help inform what technical and governance tools
are necessary for effective governance of LLM-agents.
Practical Challenges — Governance Mechanisms for LLMs Are Underdeveloped
In addition to the meta-challenges discussed above, a key challenge in exercising LLM governance is
a lack of concrete, and complete, governance proposals (Guha et al., 2023). That is, most governance
mechanisms for LLMs are underdeveloped and there is a high level of uncertainty around what the
best governance interventions will be. To elaborate, governance can operate at different points in the
LLM lifecycle, from development through to deployment and use, as well as on different substrates
such as data (Jernite et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022), compute (Hwang, 2018; Sastry et al., 2024), and
energy (Monserrate, 2022). Governance interventions earlier in the lifecycle can create choke-points
further on. For instance, if some development practice is banned so that some variety of LLM system is
never developed, such a system could not be deployed or used (Anderljung and Hazell, 2023). On the
other hand, interventions later in the lifecycle can be more targeted. This carries both advantages and
disadvantages: more targeted interventions help limit negative side-effects of governance interventions
(e.g. creating barriers to beneficial uses), but also run the risk of missing some pathways to harm.
Fortunately, the different types of governance mechanisms we discuss are not mutually exclusive, and
can likely be effectively combined to achieve better outcomes than using a single mechanism on its
own. However, currently, almost all the governance mechanisms are underdeveloped and lack concrete
proposals for operationalizing them. We provide some discussion in this regard below and highlight the
relevant challenges.
4.5.7 Use-Based Governance May Be Insufficient
One approach to governing LLMs is to set rules that limit how they can be used. Indeed, Hacker et al.
(2023) argue that governance should focus on users and deployers, with a few key exceptions. Under
such an approach, users could be held accountable for whatever harms their use of a system causes,
and consumer protection law could be used to hold developers or deployers accountable if they fail
to protect users. Particularly harmful use cases could be proscribed by designing explicit regulations.
For example, explicit laws are being passed by multiple countries that criminalize the generation of
harmful deepfake images by the use of generative image models (U.S. Congress, 2023; UK Parliament,
2023). However, enforcement of such regulations may be very difficult as a skilled malicious user could
easily hide their identity by using anonymization schemes (Eurojust and Europol, 2019). Hence, it
is questionable to what extent such regulations will be an effective deterrent for a highly skilled and
determined malicious user.
103

=== PAGE 104 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
It is also unclear to what extent such an approach would be able to proactively identify misuses of
technology, instead of acting retroactively once the harm has been done; as was observed to be the
case for deepfakes (Burga, 2024). Currently, the EU AI Act governs use cases of AI systems, including
LLMs, using a risk-based approach to classify different use cases and determine which rules apply
(Council of the European Union, 2024). However, several questions arise with such an approach: What
existing regulations — or, more generally, governance institutions — are relevant, and how should
they be applied? How can we identify problematic new use cases and ensure they are addressed (c.f.
Section 4.2)? Regulators might need fast-acting powers to intervene when new problematic uses are
discovered. More generally, an important challenge for such an approach is how to address issues
surrounding misuse, such as accountability, discussed in Section 4.2). We note that international
agreements might also be required, as many forms of misuse (e.g. military use of LLM or censorship)
are likely to be perpetrated by governments. Use-based governance may also be limited in ways it can
prevent instances of self-harm (Xiang, 2023b).
4.5.8 Deployment Governance Lacks Adequate Regulation
Deployment methodology significantly impacts the potential risks associated with an LLM. Developing
regulations,bothsoftandhard,togoverndeploymentcannotonlybeeffectivebutmayalsobenecessary
to assure safe and beneficial deployment of LLM-based systems. Deployment governance may include
pre-deployment governance and lifetimegovernance.
The pre-deployment governance is concerned with regulating how a model gets deployed. In the pre-
deployment governance, a basic challenge is to evaluate the trade-offs of different forms of deployment
(Solaiman, 2023). The common forms of deployment include making the model available to download
or making the model available via some limited form of API access (including web-interfaces).17In
particular, there is an ongoing debate around downloadable or so-called ‘open-source’ model deploy-
ments.18Shevlane (2022) argue for the benefits of ‘structured access’, i.e. controlling how users interact
with a system, which API deployment enables. Seger et al. (2023) argue that LLMs may soon be too
dangerous to open-source (at least initially). On the other hand, Kapoor et al. (2024) argue that gov-
ernments should fund research into the marginal risk from open source models (over currently available
tools, such as web search), and consider further interventions only once risks are more certain. They
also express concern that many forms of regulation might impose infeasible compliance burdens on de-
velopers of open-source models. Advancing this debate is critically important, given the irreversibility
of open-sourcing models.
The risks of deployment (even for a closed-source model) are also mediated by the intended use-case
(see Section 4.5.7), who the model is being made available to and especially by the level of autonomy
afforded to the model (Weidinger et al., 2023a). The models that are made available to younger
audiences (Fowler, 2023), or deployed autonomously (‘LLM-agents’) may require similarly higher levels
of assurance (Chan et al., 2023a; Shavit et al., 2023). Regardless of how models are deployed, deployers
could take some responsibility for ensuring LLMs are trustworthy and do not cause harm. For instance,
they might be made responsible for communicating information about limitations from developers to
users, or even be required to perform some evaluations or collect other information about a system
before agreeing to deploy it. Third-party licensing, or registrations, could be mandated to ensure that
unsafe technologies do not get deployed or become widely available.
While thoughtful development can reduce the risks associated with an LLM, it may not eliminate them.
Lifetimegovernanceisrequiredtoensurethatthroughouttheirdeployment, LLM-basedsystemsremain
safe. This includes assuring that the systems are monitored in a robust way and clear action plans are
17In practice, API deployers are often going to be large-scale compute providers; see Section 4.5.11 for more on compute
governance.
18There is also controversy and confusion around the term ‘open-source’ as applied to the practice of onlyreleasing model
weights (Widder et al., 2023; Seger et al., 2023; Solaiman, 2023).
104

=== PAGE 105 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
in place to deal with cases when a novel failure mode, or a new source of risk, is discovered (Chan et al.,
2024). One challenge requiring technical research in this regard is: how to re-establish assurance after
system updates to the LLM, or some other component of an LLM-based system, during the system’s
lifetime. Ideally, the cost of assurance in such a case could be reduced relative to assuring a brand-new
system. Another aspect of the challenge is how to deal with downstream systems using an LLM as a
‘dependency’. Deployers could help ensure users and developers share an awareness of how such updates
might lead to new safety risks.
4.5.9 Development Governance Might Be Particularly Challenging to Codify and Enforce
Most technical work in AI safety and alignment is focused on development methods. While this work is
currentlynotmatureenoughtoofferreliablerecipesforsafeandalignedLLMs, itcanalreadycontribute
to best practices that could be enshrined e.g. as standards or through regulation (UK Government,
2023). Such practices could take the form of rules around the sorts of data or algorithms to use (or not
use), as well as rules around evaluations or other assurance practices to be applied before deployment
(Schuett et al., 2023). These rules could be enforced on a per-project basis through mechanisms similar
to those in White House (2023), provided governments are aware of development projects. Others have
proposed licensing developers (Smith, 2023; Anderljung and Korinek, 2024), although critics argue this
might lead to regulatory capture, and stifle innovation and open-source development (Thierer, 2023;
Howard, 2023). Besides development methods, best practices for development should also consider
‘meta-practices’ such as processes governing internal decision-making and practices around disclosure
of development activities (Weidinger et al., 2023a; Ojewale et al., 2024; Casper et al., 2024a). To the
extent that safety and alignment can be guaranteed through following best practices in development,
mandating such practices could be an appealing approach to governance.
However, the efficacy of development governance would likely depend on achieving a high level of buy-
in from most – if not all – leading developers (see Section 4.5.3). Moreover, given the falling cost
of compute, more and more developers (including those not “in the lead”) may need to be governed,
creating a growing enforcement challenge. As most of the knowledge about sound developmental prac-
tices for the responsible development of LLMs is currently locked within AI companies, regulators, and
standard-setting organizations may be highly dependent on LLM developers sharing this knowledge to
create high-quality standards. Furthermore, a lack of buy-in from developers may result in regulatory
flight (i.e. developers moving their operations to other jurisdictions with less regulatory pressure) or
developers circumventing the prescribed external standards, e.g. by hiding parts of developmental de-
tails that may be misaligned with the prescribed standards. Such evasions may be particularly hard
to detect and prevent, given the current lack of technical tools for determining whether inappropriate
development activities are occurring (Shavit, 2023). At the same time, regulatory flight may be less of
a concern for large markets like the US or the EU.
An alternative to externally imposed regulations could be to prompt companies to propose their own
developmental standards that they could then be beholden to, once ratified by an external party (e.g.
a government regulator). However, it is important to not rely on voluntary compliance alone and to
ensure that such standards are appropriately codified and made legally binding (Ó hÉigeartaigh et al.,
2023). An example of such developmental standards are the ‘responsible scaling policies’ published
by various AI companies (Anthropic, 2023e; OpenAI, 2023d; Google DeepMind, 2023), however, these
policies are completely voluntary and due to the lack of third-party analysis of these policies, it is
unclear to what extent these policies embody desirable standards of safety.
4.5.10 LLMs Pose Additional Challenges for Data Governance
Data is a basic ingredient for LLM development. This makes data governance a promising vehicle
to govern and regulate LLMs. Data could serve as a choke-point and help prevent the development
of unsafe LLM systems; for instance, training on certain kinds of data (e.g. biological data) could be
prohibited or regulated stringently. In the pre-LLM age, the central focus of data governance has been
105

=== PAGE 106 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
the protection of an individual’s right to privacy (Solove, 2022). LLMs add an additional dimension
to this as LLMs can memorize and leak personally identifiable information (PII) (Tirumala et al.,
2022; Nasr et al., 2023). However, it is also important that the scope of data governance is expanded to
consider other data rights issues that have to come to the fore due to the development of LLMs (Roberts
and Montoya, 2022). One major objective for data governance is establishing, and defending, the rights
of data creators (e.g. writers) and the rights of data workers (e.g. workers hired to generate data for
LLM training). A popular proposal for this is the establishment of accountable organizations, such as
data trusts (Jernite et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022), to be custodians of any data submitted to them.
However, implementing such a solution requires overcoming several technical and social challenges. On
the technical side, the key problems are establishing provenance of the data already present on the
internet (Lee et al., 2023b), verifying that a particular model was trained on the dataset it is claimed
to have been trained on (Choi et al., 2023b; Garg et al., 2023), and establishing relativevalue of
different data points present within a dataset (Guu et al., 2023). On the social side, implementing such
solutions would require strong political will, extensive international cooperation, and sufficient funding
to implement the technical infrastructure needed for data trusts (Chan et al., 2022).
Furthermore, it is unclear as to who should own the data createdby an LLM – e.g. the developer, the
user, or no one (Henderson et al., 2023b)? This question is coupled with the questions of responsibility
and profitability: who is responsible if an LLM generates output that is harmful or unsafe in other ways
(Henderson et al., 2023c) (also see Section 4.5.6)? How does this responsibility change as we move from
chat-based models to agents (Schwartz and Rogers, 2022)? This is arguably a fundamental question in
regards to data economy and may have long-reaching repercussions in an AI-based creative economy
(Knibbs, 2023).
4.5.11 Robustness of Compute Governance is Unclear
Compute plays a critical role in the development of LLMs (Sevilla et al., 2022), with compute costs
for development rising into the hundreds of millions (Knight, 2023) and likely soon billions of dollars.
Compute governance may provide one of the most promising levers for governing bodies to modulate
the rate of progress within the technical AI field (Whittlestone and Clark, 2021; Sastry et al., 2024).
This may be particularly important for the safety risks associated with advanced capabilities which
compute-heavy frontier models are likely to obtain first (Pilz et al., 2023). Relative to other governance
mechanisms that governments could use to regulate AI and LLM development, compute governance
also has the advantage of potentially easier compliance verification (Brundage et al., 2020; Baker, 2023),
especially given the major intermediary role of compute providers (Heim et al., 2024). However, further
work is needed to understand and refine existing proposals for compute governance (Shavit, 2023; Choi
et al., 2023b; Egan and Heim, 2023; Sastry et al., 2024; Heim et al., 2024), in addition to managing risks
such as privacy and concentration of power (Sastry et al., 2024). Technical researchers could collaborate
with hardware and supply-chain experts to stress-test proposals, e.g. by identifying potential loopholes
by which projects might escape scrutiny (such as distributed training on consumer hardware Douillard
et al., 2023), or otherwise thwart effective oversight (such as by disguising computations). Compute
governance proposals could also be strengthened by developing a better understanding of the interplay
between hardware and software (Mince et al., 2024). Future research on compute governance could
explore potential developments that may affect the effectiveness of compute governance, such as changes
in the structure of the compute-providing industry (Anderljung and Carlier, 2021) or the diffusion of
AI capabilities (Pilz et al., 2023). Compute governance could also be leveraged by governments to
enhance the ability of the independent scientific and academic community. In addition to any direct
benefits in terms of improved understanding, and auditing, of LLMs, this may help mediate the effects
of corporate power (see Section 4.5.4).
106

=== PAGE 107 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Effective governance of LLMs is critical for ensuring that LLMs prove a beneficial addition to
societies. However, efforts to govern LLMs, and related AI technologies, remain nascent and
ill-formed. The governance of LLMs is made challenging by various meta-challenges ranging
from lack of scientific understanding and technical tools required for governance to the risks
of regulatory capture by corporations. From a more practical lens, concrete and comprehensive
proposals to govern LLMs remain absent and, unfortunately, the various governance mechanisms
(e.g. deployment governance, development governance, compute governance, data governance)
are not adequately developed yet.
181.How should governance approaches change depending on how rapidly the capabilities of
models are advancing, the rate at which they are being productized (and hence prolifer-
ating throughout society), and the degree to which we lack technical understanding of a
particular system, or LLMs in general? ←◁arrowhookright
182.What policy interventions can be taken by governing bodies to support research on alle-
viating the technical limitations inhibiting effective governance of LLM-based systems?
←◁arrowhookright
183.Should governing bodies aim to moderate the pace of progress in AI? If so, what gover-
nance mechanisms could be used for this? ←◁arrowhookright
184.How might the slow, bureaucratic nature of governments negatively impact the gover-
nance of LLMs? What are the relative merits and demerits of various measures (such
as forming public-private partnerships or formalizing regulatory markets) that could be
taken by the governments to mitigate this issue? ←◁arrowhookright
185.What measures can be taken to disincentivize irresponsible approaches to AI develop-
ment? Can we design regulations that mandate the safe and responsible development of
AI models?←◁arrowhookright
186.How can we better understand AI race dynamics, e.g. using game-theoretic models or
historical analogues? And what governance interventions might be used to alter these
dynamics?←◁arrowhookright
187.How can we involve and empower more stakeholders in LLM governance, particularly
marginalized groups most impacted by LLMs? How can we avoid legislation that dispro-
portionately favors the interests of corporate LLM developers over the interests of other
social groups?←◁arrowhookright
188.Can we develop structures for corporate governance that might protect public interests
in a better way? ←◁arrowhookright
189.Can we develop technical tools that may help measure, detect, and counteract the role
of technology companies in shaping public opinion, by influencing the content consumed
by the public?←◁arrowhookright
190.Can we develop a better understanding of the influence of corporate power on academia,
policy, and research? What are the potential detrimental effects of such influence? ←◁arrowhookright
191.Can we develop a better understanding of the factors (arms race between nations, dif-
ferent national-level approaches to AI regulation) that might negatively impact interna-
tional governance for LLMs? ←◁arrowhookright
192.What are the different ways through which LLMs could be governed in a unified way
internationally?←◁arrowhookright
193.How can clear lines of accountability be established for harms associated with LLMs?
←◁arrowhookright
194.How can governance tools be used to mitigate the risks associated with LLM-agents and
their interactions with humans and other systems? ←◁arrowhookright
107

=== PAGE 108 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
195.What are the relative merits and demerits of different governance mechanisms, such as
use-based governance, deployment governance, developmental governance, data gover-
nance and compute governance? How can we effectively combine all the governance
mechanisms to achieve the most favorable outcomes? ←◁arrowhookright←◁arrowhookright←◁arrowhookright←◁arrowhookright←◁arrowhookright
196.What existing regulations and governance institutions can be applied for use-based gov-
ernance, at national and international level? ←◁arrowhookright
197.How can we proactively identify problematic uses and address them via use-based gov-
ernance?←◁arrowhookright
198.How can use-based governance help deter misuses that are likely to be perpetrated by
governments? Can it be effectively used to regulate against instances of self-harm? ←◁arrowhookright
199.Can we develop a better understanding of the risks, and benefits, associated with various
model deployment strategies? ←◁arrowhookright
200.What kind of regulations can be adopted to ensure LLM deployers perform their due
diligence in assuring system safety before and throughout deployment? ←◁arrowhookright
201.How can we create appropriate legal frameworks for deployment governance of LLM-
agents? These frameworks would need to address the regulatory criteria for deploying
LLM-agents, how such agents should be monitored after deployment, and who would be
accountable for any harm incurred by deployed agents. ←◁arrowhookright
202.How can we efficiently assure an LLM-based system after a system upgrade to the LLM,
or some other component of LLM-based system? ←◁arrowhookright
203.What are the merits and demerits of requiring deployers to seek licenses, or register, with
regulators prior to the release of the model? Should the requirements that deployers have
to meet be different for different deployment strategies? ←◁arrowhookright
204.How can developers best identify and share knowledge about responsible LLM (and AI)
development among themselves? How can such practices be enshrined as legally binding
standards?←◁arrowhookright
205.What are the merits and demerits of mandating licensing for the development of frontier
AI technologies? ←◁arrowhookright
206.Can we develop technical tools that may help us verify whether particular developmental
practices were followed or not in the development of a given model? ←◁arrowhookright
207.To what extent is regulatory flight likely to impede the effective governance of LLMs?
←◁arrowhookright
208.What are the merits and demerits of ‘responsible scaling policies’ issued by different
LLM developers? ←◁arrowhookright
209.How can we establish and defend the rights of data creators (e.g. writers) and the rights
of data workers (e.g. workers hired to generate data for LLM training)? Are data trusts
(Chan et al., 2022) a practical solution in this regard? ←◁arrowhookright
210.How can we verify that a particular model was indeed trained exclusively on the data
claimed as training data by the model creator? ←◁arrowhookright
211.Who owns the data created by an LLM? This is arguably one of the most critical ques-
tions in governance with downstream impact on other important questions of who bears
responsibility for LLM outputs that cause harm to society, and who can profit from the
LLM outputs.←◁arrowhookright
212.Can we develop concrete proposals for how compute governance could be exercised in
practice?←◁arrowhookright
213.To what extent are current, and any future, proposals for compute governance robust to
advances in distributed training? ←◁arrowhookright
108

=== PAGE 109 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
214.How will compute governance proposals be impacted by the changes in the structure of
the compute-providing industry? ←◁arrowhookright
215.How can compute governance be leveraged to enhance the ability of the independent
scientific community to conduct investigations into flaws in LLMs that could otherwise
be overlooked?←◁arrowhookright
109

=== PAGE 110 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
5 Discussion
5.1 Limitations
This agenda is the most expansive discussion on the challenges in assuring the safety and alignment of
LLM-based systems to date. However, despite this, we assert that this agenda is notexhaus-
tive and that there exist important challenges, both known and unknown, in assuring the
safety and alignment of LLM-based systems that are not cataloged in this work.
We have attempted to ‘future-proof’ our work by trying to list challenges that might arise due to LLMs
becoming more performant due to scaling or modifications of the training process, however, due to the
uncertain nature of the LLM development landscape, it is possible that important challenges may have
been omitted. In particular, we have primarily focused on challenges in the LLM safety and alignment
that are imminent, and relatively undisputed, and hence, we do not cover speculative challenges; see
Hendrycks et al. (2023) and Critch and Krueger (2020) for discussion on such challenges.
Another key limitation of this work is the exclusive focus on the safety and alignment of LLM-based
systems. The choice to focus on the safety and alignment of LLMs was made due to the surging research
interest in LLMs, their rapid productization, and their central position in the age of foundation models.
We assert that the safety of other deep learning-based systems (e.g. generative models for vision,
generativemodelsforbiology, recommendersystems, andlearning-basedembodiedagents)isalsohighly
important and we call on the wider community to organize similar efforts to catalog challenges involved
in the safety of such non-LLM-based systems. Relatedly, due to the limited scope of our work, we
have intentionally omitted many important research directions pertaining to the safe development and
deployment of aligned AI-based systems, such as improving the general understanding of deep learning
(Aroraetal.,2020), understandingcriticalaspectsofagency(‘agentfoundations’SoaresandFallenstein,
2014), anddevelopingAIsystemswhosesafetycanbeprovedorverified(Brundageetal.,2020;Tegmark
and Omohundro, 2023), cooperative AI (Dafoe et al., 2020) etc.
Another dimension of our limited coverage is that our major focus is on technical challenges — 13 out
of 18 challenges we identify are fully technical in nature. Our discussion of sociotechnical challenges
is further limited in the sense that it is narrowly focused on challenges that are directly relevant
to LLM-based systems and is biased towards aspects of these challenges that could potentially be
addressed via research. We have also discussed sociotechnical challenges in a dedicated section as we
prioritized modularity to make the work easier to navigate for a wide audience. However, this view
oversimplifies the interconnectedness between the technical challenges and the broader sociotechnical
challenges involved. An alternative treatment focused on highlighting this interconnected nature of
safety challenges would see sociotechnical issues spread throughout every aspect of work on LLMs.
Additionally, while we have made our best effort to avoid any geographic bias — in some sections,
particularly Section 4.5, the discussion is biased towards few geographies, specifically, US, Europe and
China.
The nature of the challenges posed in this work may change over time. Some challenges may get
sidestepped or solved as a side-effect of advances focused on improving LLM performance (e.g. scal-
ing). For some other challenges, their form may evolve, causing the identified corresponding research
directions to become outdated. Most importantly, advances in LLM development may uncover novel
challenges or make some of the existing challenges much more critical to address.
5.2 Prior Work
This work comes on the back of several works focused on highlighting harms, risks, and various other
societal challenges posed by LLMs, and other advanced AI systems they may give way to (Bengio et al.,
2023). These risks have been recognized by various governing bodies around the world, e.g. United
States government (hou, 2023), United Kingdom government (Office, 2023), and the United Nations
110

=== PAGE 111 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
(Nichols, 2023). Among scholarly work, Weidinger et al. (2022) and Shelby et al. (2022) review and
taxonomize various harms and risks posed by LLMs and other AI systems. Shevlane et al. (2023)
propose evaluating LLMs for ‘dangerous’ capabilities that may pose extreme risks. To improve risk
assessment, Weidinger et al. (2023a) propose a framework for sociotechnical evaluation of LLMs and
other generative systems. In a similar vein, Solaiman et al. (2023) call for evaluating AI systems,
including LLMs, for social impact. Other works examine the possible societal impacts of LLMs —
Eloundou et al. (2023) review possible disruptions to job market that might be caused by LLMs and
Brundage et al. (2018) highlight ways in which AI systems may be misused by malicious actors. There
additionally exist works that focus on discussing societal-scale harms that may occur if a misaligned
competent AI system is allowed to act in an unsafe way (Critch and Krueger, 2020; Hendrycks et al.,
2023; Critch and Russell, 2023). Our work is complementary to all the aforementioned work as we
focus on listing technical and sociotechnical challenges that need to be addressed to overcome these
challenges.
Several prior works have attempted to identify critical open problems and outline research directions,
for the development of safe and aligned AI systems. Kenton et al. (2021) is perhaps the closest work
to ours in scope but contains a much narrower discussion regarding the safety of LLM-based systems.
Similarly, thereexistpublicagendasbyleadingLLMcompaniesthatoutlinetheirapproachtosafetyand
alignment of LLM-based systems (Leike et al., 2022; Anthropic, 2023a). However, these agendas lack
diversity and are primarily focused on the research directions being championed by the corresponding
company. In contrast, our work boasts a diverse academic authors lineup and platforms diverse research
directions. Amodei et al. (2016) and Hendrycks et al. (2021a) share a similar goal to ours of highlighting
important challenges that require to be addressed for safe AI; however, they lack explicit focus on
LLMs. Other similar efforts include Dafoe et al. (2020) and Ecoffet et al. (2020), which respectively
consider alignment and safety of multi-agent and open-ended systems. Other works have argued for
specific approaches for the development of safe AI systems; Leike et al. (2018) argue for scalable reward
modeling to align advanced AI systems, Tegmark and Omohundro (2023) argue for distilling learned
logicofAIsystemsintocodewhichcanbeformallyverified, andBrundageetal.(2020)callfordesigning
institutional, software and hardware infrastructure to support verifiability of the claims made about
AI systems. Dafoe (2018) and Shavit et al. (2023) are agendas focused on governance aspects of AI
systems. There also exist several other agendas focused on the safety of AI-based systems with varying
levels of relevance to the safety and alignment of LLM-based systems (Russell et al., 2015; Soares and
Fallenstein, 2014; Henderson et al., 2018; Dinan et al., 2021; Gruetzemacher et al., 2021). Also related
to our work are studies such as Gabriel (2020) and Prabhakaran et al. (2022a), which consider the
question of what the alignment target ought to be for general-purpose AI systems like LLMs.
Due to the focus on LLMs, our work is also related to other agendas and surveys on LLMs. The
notable agendas include Kaddour et al. (2023) and Huyen (2023), which review challenges in LLM
research and applications of LLMs in general, without any explicit focus on safety or alignment. Among
surveys, Bowman (2023) is a short survey that provides an opinionated review of key facts about
LLMs’ development. Zhao et al. (2023) comprehensively review the various facets of LLM development
and their utilization, including techniques used to promote safety and alignment. Ji et al. (2023b)
provide a review of alignment techniques in the context of foundation models. There also exist several
surveys on specific aspects of LLMs that are covered in this work; Dong et al. (2022) survey the
literature on in-context learning, Huang and Chang (2022) provide extensive discussion on reasoning
capabilities of LLMs, Mozes et al. (2023) review security related issues of LLMs, and Casper et al.
(2023a) survey limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback for safety finetuning of LLMs
and the associated open problems.
In the aftermath of the unexpected success of LLMs, there has been a growing sense that ‘impactful’
machine learning and natural language processing research requires tremendous resources and thus is no
111

=== PAGE 112 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
longer viable for academic researchers. This work is partially inspired as a rebuttal to that perspective
and posits that alignment and safety are ripe fields for contributions by academic researchers. Other
related efforts include Saphra et al. (2023) and Ignat et al. (2023). Saphra et al. use historical analogies
to argue that current disparities between academic and industrial labs regarding the scale of resources
are temporary and argue that evaluations and data are still the primary bottlenecks. Ignat et al.
similarly rebut the perspective that NLP research is no longer amenable to academic research by
highlighting various under-researched research areas within NLP and other related fields.
Acknowledgements
We, in particular UA, would like to thank Robert Kirk, Lorenz Kuhn, Nicholas Carlini, Katherine
Lee, Alexander Rush, Geoffery Irving, Greg Yang, Sam Bowman, Mikita Balesni and Tim Rudner for
discussions and feedback on the idea and initial outline(s) of this work. We would additionally like to
thank Will Merrill, Spencer Frei, Kawin Ethayarajh, Kayo Yin, Roger Grosse, Victor Veitch, Sylvia Lu,
Bilal Chughtai, Bruno Kacper Mlodozeniec, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, Matthew-Farrugia Roberts, Ben
Bucknall, Dan Hendrycks, Neel Nanda, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Seth Lazar, Percy Liang, Justin
Bullock, Sara Hooker and many others for providing helpful feedback on the draft. We also thank Elio
Arturo Farina for his in-kind support with Latex formatting and typesetting. All errors and omissions
are our own.
References
Jan Leike, John Schulman, and Jeffrey Wu. Our approach to alignment research, 2022. https:
//openai.com/blog/our-approach-to-alignment-research .
Anthropic. Core Views on AI Safety: When, Why, What, and How, 2023a. https://www.anthropic.
com/index/core-views-on-ai-safety .
Frontier Model Forum. Introducing the Frontier Model Forum, 2023. https://www.frontiermodelf
orum.org/updates/announcing-the-frontier-model-forum/ . Accessed on: January 8, 2024.
White House. Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial
Intelligence. Presidential Actions, October 2023. URL https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-r
oom/presidential-actions/2023/10/30/executive-order-on-the-safe-secure-and-trustwo
rthy-development-and-use-of-artificial-intelligence/ .
UK PM Office. Prime Minister calls for global responsibility to take AI risks seriously and seize its
opportunities, October 2023. https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-calls-f
or-global-responsibility-to-take-ai-risks-seriously-and-seize-its-opportunities .
Accessed on: January 8, 2023.
UN AI Advisory Board. Interim Report: Governing AI for Humanity, 2023. URL https://www.un.o
rg/sites/un2.un.org/files/ai%5Fadvisory%5Fbody%5Finterim%5Freport.pdf .
Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, Andrew Yao, Dawn Song, Pieter Abbeel, Yuval Noah Harari, Ya-Qin
Zhang, Lan Xue, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Gillian Hadfield, et al. Managing AI risks in an era of rapid
progress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17688 , 2023.
FAccT. Statement on AI Harms and Policy, 2023. URL https://facctconference.org/2023/har
m-policy .
CAIS. Statement on AI Risk: AI experts and public figures express their concern about AI risk, 2023.
https://www.safe.ai/statement-on-ai-risk .
112

=== PAGE 113 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
CHAI, Far.ai, and Ditchley Foundation. Prominent AI Scientists from China and the West Propose
Joint Strategy to Mitigate Risks from AI, 2023. https://humancompatible.ai/news/2023/10/31
/prominent-ai-scientists-from-china-and-the-west-propose-joint-strategy-to-mitigat
e-risks-from-ai/ . Accessed on: January 8, 2024.
Richard Ngo, Lawrence Chan, and Sören Mindermann. The alignment problem from a deep learning
perspective, 2023.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. DistilBERT, a distilled version of
BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108 , 2019.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712 , 2023.
Meredith Ringel Morris, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Noah Fiedel, Tris Warkentin, Allan Dafoe, Aleksandra
Faust, Clement Farabet, and Shane Legg. Levels of AGI: Operationalizing Progress on the Path to
AGI.arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02462 , 2023.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm from
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359 , 2021.
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Liane Lovitt, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly,
Nova Dassarma, Dawn Drain, Nelson Elhage, et al. Predictability and surprise in large generative
models. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages 1747–1764,
2022.
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Prabhu, Sang Han, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. On Hate Scaling Laws For
Data-Swamps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13141 , 2023.
Alan Chan, Rebecca Salganik, Alva Markelius, Chris Pang, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Dmitrii Krashenin-
nikov, Lauro Langosco, Zhonghao He, Yawen Duan, Micah Carroll, et al. Harms from Increasingly
Agentic Algorithmic Systems. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountabil-
ity, and Transparency , pages 651–666, 2023a.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
crete problems in AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016.
Dan Hendrycks, Nicholas Carlini, John Schulman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Unsolved Problems in ML
Safety.arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13916 , 2021a.
Andrew Critch and David Krueger. AI research considerations for human existential safety (ARCHES).
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04948 , 2020.
Zachary Kenton, Tom Everitt, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, Vladimir Mikulik, and Geoffrey Irving.
Alignment of Language Agents, 2021.
Paul Christiano. Clarifying “AI Alignment”, April 7 2018. URL https://ai-alignment.com/clari
fying-ai-alignment-cec47cd69dd6 .
Iason Gabriel. Artificial intelligence, values, and alignment. Minds and machines , 30(3):411–437, 2020.
Nancy G Leveson. Engineering a safer world: Systems thinking applied to safety . The MIT Press, 2016.
113

=== PAGE 114 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Laura Weidinger, Maribeth Rauh, Nahema Marchal, Arianna Manzini, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Juan
Mateos-Garcia, Stevie Bergman, Jackie Kay, Conor Griffin, Ben Bariach, et al. Sociotechnical Safety
Evaluation of Generative AI Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11986 , 2023a.
RobAshmore, RaduCalinescu, andColinPaterson. Assuringthemachinelearninglifecycle: Desiderata,
methods, and challenges. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 54(5):1–39, 2021.
Stephen Casper, Carson Ezell, Charlotte Siegmann, Noam Kolt, Taylor Lynn Curtis, Benjamin Buck-
nall, Andreas Haupt, Kevin Wei, Jérémy Scheurer, Marius Hobbhahn, Lee Sharkey, Satyapriya Kr-
ishna, Marvin Von Hagen, Silas Alberti, Alan Chan, Qinyi Sun, Michael Gerovitch, David Bau, Max
Tegmark, ..., and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Black-Box Access is Insufficient for Rigorous AI Audits,
2024a.
Ari Holtzman, Peter West, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Generative Models as a Complex Systems Science:
How can we make sense of large language model behavior? arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00189 , 2023.
Jacob Steinhardt. Complex Systems are Hard to Control, 2023. https://bounded-regret.ghost.io
/complex-systems-are-hard-to-control/ .
Dan Hendrycks. Introduction to AI Safety, Ethics, and Society . 2023.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, DennyZhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models. Transactions
on Machine Learning Research , 2022a. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?i
d=yzkSU5zdwD . Survey Certification.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S.
Bernstein. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , Uist ’23, New York, NY, USA,
aug 2023a. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701320. arXiv:2304.03442 [cs].
Kevin MacG Adams, Patrick T Hester, Joseph M Bradley, Thomas J Meyers, and Charles B Keating.
Systems theory as the foundation for understanding systems. Systems Engineering , 17(1):112–123,
2014.
Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon. Computer science as empirical inquiry: symbols and search.
Commun. ACM , 19(3):113–126, 1976. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/360018.360022 .
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Pap
er.pdf.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Abhilasha Ravichander, Ximing Lu, Nouha Dziri, Melanie Sclar, Khyathi Chandu,
Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. The Unlocking Spell on Base LLMs: Rethinking Alignment
via In-Context Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01552 , 2023a.
Zeming Wei, Yifei Wang, and Yisen Wang. Jailbreak and guard aligned language models with only few
in-context demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06387 , 2023a.
114

=== PAGE 115 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Sophie Xhonneux, David Dobre, Jian Tang, Gauthier Gidel, and Dhanya Sridhar. In-context learning
can re-learn forbidden tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05723 , 2024.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2305.16291 , 2023a.
Yotam Wolf, Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. Fundamental Limitations of Alignment
in Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11082 , 2023.
Raphaël Millière. The Alignment Problem in Context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02147 , 2023.
Cem Anil, Esin Durmus, Mrinank Sharma, Joe Benton, Sandipan Kundu, Joshua Batson, Nina Rimsky,
Meg Tong, Jesse Mu, Daniel Ford, Francesco Mosconi, Rajashree Agrawal, Rylan Schaeffer, Naomi
Bashkansky, Samuel Svenningsen, Mike Lambert, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Carson Denison, Evan J
Hubinger, Yuntao Bai, Trenton Bricken, Timothy Maxwell, Nicholas Schiefer, Jamie Sully, Alex
Tamkin, Tamera Lanham, Karina Nguyen, Tomasz Korbak, Jared Kaplan, Deep Ganguli, Samuel R.
Bowman, Ethan Perez, Roger Grosse, and David Duvenaud. Many-shot Jailbreaking. Preprint, 2024.
Rishabh Agarwal, Avi Singh, Lei M Zhang, Bernd Bohnet, Stephanie Chan, Ankesh Anand, Zaheer
Abbas, Azade Nova, John D Co-Reyes, Eric Chu, et al. Many-shot in-context learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.11018 , 2024.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An Explanation of In-context
Learning as Implicit Bayesian Inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=RdJVFCHjUMI .
XinyiWang, WanrongZhu, andWilliamYangWang. Largelanguagemodelsareimplicitlytopicmodels:
Explainingandfindinggooddemonstrationsforin-contextlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11916 ,
2023b.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.07895 , 2023.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.12837 , 2022.
Eric Todd, Millicent L Li, Arnab Sen Sharma, Aaron Mueller, Byron C Wallace, and David Bau.
Function Vectors in Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15213 , 2023.
Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-context learning creates task vectors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.15916 , 2023.
Eric J. Bigelow, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P. Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, and Tomer D. Ullman.
In-Context Learning Dynamics with Random Binary Sequences, 2023.
Sivaramakrishnan Swaminathan, Antoine Dedieu, Rajkumar Vasudeva Raju, Murray Shanahan, Miguel
Lazaro-Gredilla, and Dileep George. Schema-learning and rebinding as mechanisms of in-context
learning and emergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01201 , 2023.
Ninareh Mehrabi, Palash Goyal, Christophe Dupuy, Qian Hu, Shalini Ghosh, Richard Zemel, Kai-Wei
Chang, Aram Galstyan, and Rahul Gupta. Flirt: Feedback loop in-context red teaming. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.04265 , 2023.
115

=== PAGE 116 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi.
Teaching algorithmic reasoning via in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09066 , 2022.
Abulhair Saparov, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Vishakh Padmakumar, Nitish Joshi, Seyed Mehran Kazemi,
Najoung Kim, and He He. Testing the General Deductive Reasoning Capacity of Large Language
Models Using OOD Examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15269 , 2023.
Yufeng Zhang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. What and How does In-Context
Learning Learn? Bayesian Model Averaging, Parameterization, and Generalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.19420 , 2023a.
Evan Hubinger, Chris van Merwijk, Vladimir Mikulik, Joar Skalse, and Scott Garrabrant. Risks from
learned optimization in advanced machine learning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01820 , 2019.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Maximilian Schlegel, Seijin Kobayashi, Nicolas Zucchet, Nino
Scherrer, Nolan Miller, Mark Sandler, Max Vladymyrov, Razvan Pascanu, et al. Uncovering mesa-
optimization algorithms in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05858 , 2023.
Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-context
learning by meta-learning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04458 , 2022.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
rithm is in-context learning? Investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661 ,
2022a.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.07677 , 2022.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
in-context? A case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A Smith. How language model halluci-
nations can snowball. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13534 , 2023b.
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00297 , 2023.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as Statisticians: Provable
In-Context Learning with In-Context Algorithm Selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04637 , 2023a.
Abhishek Panigrahi, Sadhika Malladi, Mengzhou Xia, and Sanjeev Arora. Trainable transformer in
transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01189 , 2023.
Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Transformers as Decision Makers: Provable In-Context Reinforce-
ment Learning via Supervised Pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08566 , 2023b.
Deqing Fu, Tian-Qi Chen, Robin Jia, and Vatsal Sharan. Transformers Learn Higher-Order Op-
timization Methods for In-Context Learning: A Study with Linear Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.17086 , 2023a.
Ziqian Zhong, Ziming Liu, Max Tegmark, and Jacob Andreas. The clock and the pizza: Two stories in
mechanistic explanation of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17844 , 2023a.
116

=== PAGE 117 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Are
transformersuniversalapproximatorsofsequence-to-sequencefunctions? In International Conference
on Learning Representations , 2019.
Zhong Li, Jiequn Han, E Weinan, and Qianxiao Li. Approximation and optimization theory for linear
continuous-time recurrent neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(42):1–85,
2022a.
Shida Wang and Beichen Xue. State-space models with layer-wise nonlinearity are universal approxi-
mators with exponential decaying memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36,
2023.
NicolaMucaCirone, AntonioOrvieto, BenjaminWalker, CristopherSalvi, andTerryLyons. Theoretical
foundations of deep selective state-space models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19047 , 2024.
Yihan Wang, Jatin Chauhan, Wei Wang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Universality and limitations of prompt
tuning.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023c.
Aleksandar Petrov, Philip HS Torr, and Adel Bibi. Prompting a pretrained transformer can be a
universal approximator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14753 , 2024.
Aleksandar Petrov, Philip Torr, and Adel Bibi. When do prompting and prefix-tuning work? a theory
of capabilities and limitations. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2023a.
Ivan Lee, Nan Jiang, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Exploring the relationship between model ar-
chitecture and in-context learning ability. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2023a.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan, Ben
Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac
Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, ...,
and Chris Olah. In-context Learning and Induction Heads. Transformer Circuits Thread , 2022.
https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.
Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context clas-
sification task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03002 , 2023.
Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Language Models Implement Simple Word2Vec-style
Vector Arithmetic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16130 , 2023a.
Danny Halawi, Jean-Stanislas Denain, and Jacob Steinhardt. Overthinking the truth: Understanding
how language models process false demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09476 , 2023.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu,
Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.03846 , 2023b.
Allan Raventós, Mansheej Paul, Feng Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Pretraining task diversity and the
emergence of non-Bayesian in-context learning for regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15063 , 2023.
Stephanie CY Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K Lampinen, Jane X Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre H
Richemond, Jay McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent few-shot
learning in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05055 , 2022.
117

=== PAGE 118 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
MichaelHahnandNavinGoyal. Atheoryofemergentin-contextlearningasimplicitstructureinduction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07971 , 2023.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The Pile: An 800GB
Dataset of Diverse Text for Language Modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027 , 2020.
Together Computer. RedPajama: an Open Dataset for Training Large Language Models, October 2023.
URL https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data .
Aaditya K Singh, Stephanie CY Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew M Saxe, and Felix Hill. The
transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08360 ,
2023.
Toby Shevlane, Sebastian Farquhar, Ben Garfinkel, Mary Phuong, Jess Whittlestone, Jade Leung,
Daniel Kokotajlo, Nahema Marchal, Markus Anderljung, Noam Kolt, et al. Model evaluation for
extreme risks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15324 , 2023.
Melanie Mitchell. How do we know how smart AI systems are?, 2023.
Margot Kaminski. Regulating the Risks of AI. Boston University Law Review , 103:1347, 2023.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199 , 2013.
R Thomas McCoy, Shunyu Yao, Dan Friedman, Matthew Hardy, and Thomas L Griffiths. Embers of
autoregression: Understanding large language models through the problem they are trained to solve.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13638 , 2023.
Gemini Team. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context.
Technical report, Google DeepMind, 2024. https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/g
emini/gemini_v1_5_report.pdf .
Garrett Tanzer, Mirac Suzgun, Eline Visser, Dan Jurafsky, and Luke Melas-Kyriazi. A benchmark
for learning to translate a new language from one grammar book. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16575 ,
2023.
Nicholas Carlini. A GPT-4 Capability Forecasting Challenge, 2023a. https://nicholas.carlini.c
om/writing/llm-forecast/question/Capital-of-Paris . Accessed on: December 18, 2023.
Ernest Davis. The limitations of standardized science tests as benchmarks for artificial intelligence
research: Position paper. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1629 , 2014.
Tomer Ullman. Large language models fail on trivial alterations to theory-of-mind tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.08399 , 2023.
Pei Zhou, Aman Madaan, Srividya Pranavi Potharaju, Aditya Gupta, Kevin R McKee, Ari Holtzman,
Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren, Swaroop Mishra, Aida Nematzadeh, et al. How FaR Are Large Language
Models From Agents with Theory-of-Mind? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03051 , 2023a.
Natalie Shapira, Mosh Levy, Seyed Hossein Alavi, Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, Yoav Goldberg, Maarten
Sap, and Vered Shwartz. Clever hans or neural theory of mind? Stress testing social reasoning in
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14763 , 2023.
Hyunwoo Kim, Melanie Sclar, Xuhui Zhou, Ronan Le Bras, Gunhee Kim, Yejin Choi, and Maarten Sap.
FANToM: A Benchmark for Stress-testing Machine Theory of Mind in Interactions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.15421 , 2023.
118

=== PAGE 119 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine Intelli-
gence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.
Samyak Jain, Robert Kirk, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P. Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, Edward Grefen-
stette, TimRocktäschel, andDavidScottKrueger. Mechanisticallyanalyzingtheeffectsoffine-tuning
on procedurally defined tasks, 2023a.
BehnamNeyshabur, SrinadhBhojanapalli, DavidMcAllester, andNatiSrebro. Exploringgeneralization
in deep learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017a.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds for
deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.11008 , 2017.
Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, and Nathan Srebro. A pac-bayesian approach to spectrally-
normalized margin bounds for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09564 , 2017b.
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Behnam Neyshabur, and Yi Zhang. Stronger generalization bounds for deep
nets via a compression approach. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 254–263.
PMLR, 2018.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
smoothing. In international conference on machine learning , pages 1310–1320. Pmlr, 2019.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham, Leslie Rice, Mingjie Sun, and J Zico
Kolter. (certified!!) Adversarial robustness for free! arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10550 , 2022.
Dingli Yu, Simran Kaur, Arushi Gupta, Jonah Brown-Cohen, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora. Skill-
Mix: A flexible and expandable family of evaluations for AI models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17567 ,
2023a.
Ali Shirali, Rediet Abebe, and Moritz Hardt. A theory of dynamic benchmarks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.03165 , 2022.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter. Zoom
in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001, 2020.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
pretability in the Wild: a Circuit for Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 Small. In The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations , sep 2022. URL https://openreview.net/f
orum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul .
John B Carroll. Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies . Cambridge University
Press, 1993.
Ryan Burnell, Han Hao, Andrew RA Conway, and Jose Hernandez Orallo. Revealing the structure of
language model capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10062 , 2023a.
Xiting Wang, Liming Jiang, Jose Hernandez-Orallo, Luning Sun, David Stillwell, Fang Luo, and Xing
Xie. Evaluating General-Purpose AI with Psychometrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16379 , 2023d.
Jonathan Chang, Sean Gerrish, Chong Wang, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and David Blei. Reading tea leaves:
How humans interpret topic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 22, 2009.
119

=== PAGE 120 ===

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (09/2024)
MarkChen, JerryTworek, HeewooJun, QimingYuan, HenriquePondedeOliveiraPinto, JaredKaplan,
HarriEdwards, YuriBurda, NicholasJoseph, GregBrockman, etal. Evaluatinglargelanguagemodels
trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021a.
Boyi Wei, Kaixuan Huang, Yangsibo Huang, Tinghao Xie, Xiangyu Qi, Mengzhou Xia, Prateek Mittal,
Mengdi Wang, and Peter Henderson. Assessing the brittleness of safety alignment via pruning and
low-rank modifications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05162 , 2024.
Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Circuit component reuse across tasks in transformer
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08744 , 2023b.
Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Kushal Kafle, Robik Shrestha, Christopher Kanan, and Anton Van
Den Hengel. On the value of out-of-distribution testing: An example of goodhart’s law. Advances in
neural information processing systems , 33:407–417, 2020.
Ryan Burnell, Wout Schellaert, John Burden, Tomer D Ullman, Fernando Martinez-Plumed, Joshua B
Tenenbaum, Danaja Rutar, Lucy G Cheke, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Melanie Mitchell, et al. Rethink
reporting of evaluation results in AI. Science, 380(6641):136–138, 2023b.
Qiming Bao, Gaël Gendron, Alex Yuxuan Peng, Wanjun Zhong, Neset Tan, Yang Chen, Michael Wit-
brock, and Jiamou Liu. A Systematic Evaluation of Large Language Models on Out-of-Distribution
Logical Reasoning Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09430 , 2023.
EmanueleLaMalfa,AleksandarPetrov,SimonFrieder,ChristophWeinhuber,RyanBurnell,AnthonyG
Cohn, Nigel Shadbolt, and Michael Wooldridge. Language Models as a Service: Overview of a new
paradigm and its challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16573 , 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300 ,
2020a.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.03874 , 2021b.
Minje Choi, Jiaxin Pei, Sagar Kumar, Chang Shu, and David Jurgens. Do LLMs Understand Social
Knowledge? Evaluating the Sociability of Large Language Models with SocKET Benchmark. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.14938 , 2023a.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
clinical knowledge. Nature, 620(7972):172–180, 2023a.
Qiantong Xu, Fenglu Hong, Bo Li, Changran Hu, Zhengyu Chen, and Jian Zhang. On the Tool
Manipulation Capability of Open-source Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16504 ,
2023a.
Rahul Ramesh, Mikail Khona, Robert P Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, and Ekdeep Singh Lubana. How
Capable Can a Transformer Become? A Study on Synthetic, Interpretable Tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.12997 , 2023.
Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Bao Sheng Loe, John Burden, José Hernández-Orallo, et al. How
general-purpose is a language model? Usefulness and safety with human prompters in the wild. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pages 5295–5303, 2022.
120